

PART I


_First appearance of the men-women, descendants of those inhabitants of
Sodom who were spared by the fire from heaven._

‘Woman will have Gomorrah and man will have Sodom.’

Alfred de Vigny

As we know, well before going that day (the day when the Princesse de
Guermantes’ soirée was taking place) to pay the call on the Duc and
Duchesse that I have just recounted, I had been watching out for their
return and had, in the course of my vigil, made a discovery, involving
M. de Charlus in particular, but so significant in itself that up until
now, when I am able to give it the position and dimensions it requires,
I have put off reporting it. I had, as I have said, abandoned the
splendid vantage point, so comfortably installed at the top of the
house, from where you can take in the uneven inclines by which ascent is
made to the de Bréquigny _hôtel_, gaily ornamented in the Italian style
by the pink campanile of the coachhouse belonging to the Marquis de
Frécourt. I had found it more practical, once I thought that the Duc and
Duchesse were on the point of returning, to station myself on the
staircase. I a little regretted ending my sojourn on high. But at this
hour of the day, which was that following lunch, I had less cause for
regret, for I would not have seen, as in the morning, the footmen from
the de Bréquigny and de Tresmes _hôtel_, reduced by the distance to tiny
figures in a painting, making their slow ascent of the abrupt rise,
feather duster in hand, between the large sheets of transparent mica
that stood out so pleasingly against the red foothills.² Lacking the
perspective of the geologist, I at least had that of the botanist, and
gazed through the shutters on the stairs at the Duchesse’s small shrub
and the precious plant, exhibited in the courtyard with that insistence
with which the marriageable young are thrust forward, and I wondered
whether, by some providential chance, the improbable insect would come
to visit the tendered and forlorn pistil. Curiosity gradually
emboldening me, I descended as far as the ground-floor window, which was
also open, and whose shutters were only half closed. I could distinctly
hear Jupien getting ready to leave, who could not have detected me
behind my blind, where I remained motionless up until the moment when I
sprang hurriedly aside for fear of being seen by M. de Charlus, who, on
his way to visit Mme de Villeparisis, was slowly crossing the courtyard,
pot-bellied, aged by the full daylight, greying. It had taken an
indisposition on Mme de Villeparisis’s part (a consequence of the
illness of the Marquis de Fierbois, with whom he personally was at
daggers drawn) for M. de Charlus to pay a visit, for perhaps the first
time in his life, at this hour of the day. For with that singularity of
the Guermantes who, instead of conforming to the life of society,
modified it in accordance with their own habits (unworldly, so they
believed, and deserving in consequence that worldliness, that thing of
no value, should be humbled before them – thus it was that Mme de
Marsantes did not have her ‘day’ but entertained her women friends every
morning, from 10 till 12), the Baron, setting this time aside for
reading, or for hunting for old curios and the like, only ever went
visiting between 4 and 6 in the evening. At 6 he would go to the Jockey
Club or for a drive in the Bois.³ A moment later, I once again drew back
so as not to be seen by Jupien; it would soon be his time for leaving
for his office, from where he returned only for dinner, or even not at
all for the past week, since his niece had gone off to the country with
her apprentices to a customer’s to finish a dress. Then, realizing that
no one could see me, I resolved not to be disturbed again for fear of
missing, were the miracle to occur, the arrival, almost impossible to
hope for (across all the obstacles, the distance, the contrary chances,
the dangers), of the insect sent from afar as an ambassador to the
virgin whose wait had been so long protracted. I knew that this wait was
no more passive than with the male flower, whose stamens had
spontaneously turned so that the insect might the more easily receive
him; similarly, the flower-woman that was here would, should the insect
come, arch her ‘styles’ coquettishly and, in order to be penetrated more
fully by him, would imperceptibly, like a hypocritical but ardent young
damsel, come to meet him half-way. The laws of the vegetable world are
themselves governed by ever higher laws. If the visit of an insect, that
is to say, the bringing of the seed from another flower, is necessary as
a rule to fertilize a flower, this is because self-fertilization, the
fertilization of the flower by itself, like repeated marriages within
the same family, would lead to degeneration and sterility, whereas the
cross-breeding effected by insects gives to succeeding generations of
the same species a vigour unknown among their elders. This new lease of
life may be excessive, however, and the species develop
disproportionately; then, just as an anti-toxin protects us against
disease, or as the thyroid controls our waistline, or as defeat comes to
punish pride, or fatigue pleasure, and as sleep in turn reposes us from
fatigue, so an exceptional act of self-fertilization comes at the
appointed time to give its own turn to the screw, to apply the brake,
and bring the flower that had exaggeratedly departed from the norm back
within it. My reflections had been following an incline that I shall
describe in due course, and I had already drawn from the conspicuous
stratagem of the flowers a consequence bearing on a whole unconscious
element in the work of literature, when I saw M. de Charlus coming out
again from the Marquise’s. A few minutes only had elapsed since he had
gone in. Perhaps he had learned from his elderly relative herself, or
merely through a servant, of the great improvement or rather the
complete recovery from what in Mme de Villeparisis’s case had been only
a passing indisposition. At that moment, when he thought no one to be
watching him, his eyelids lowered against the sunlight, M. de Charlus
had relaxed the tension in his face and muffled the factitious vitality
sustained in him by animated chit-chat and by force of will. Pale as a
marble statue, he had a large nose, but his fine features no longer
received a different meaning from a wilful gaze that might detract from
the beauty of their modelling; nothing more now than a Guermantes, he
seemed already sculpted, he, Palamède XV, in the chapel at Combray. Yet
these features common to a whole family took on, in M. de Charlus’s
face, a more spiritualized, above all a gentler, delicacy. I regretted
for his sake that he should habitually adulterate, by his many
violences, his disagreeable idiosyncrasies, his scandal-mongering, his
severity, his touchiness and his arrogance, that he should conceal,
beneath a spurious brutality, the amenity and kindness I could see
displayed so artlessly on his face at the moment when he emerged from
Mme de Villeparisis’s. Blinking against the sunlight, he seemed almost
to be smiling, and in his face, seen thus in repose and as it were in
its natural state, I found something so affectionate, so defenceless,
that I could not help reflecting how angry M. de Charlus would have been
had he known he was being watched; for what he put me in mind of, this
man who was so enamoured of, who so prided himself on, his virility, who
found everyone hatefully effeminate, what he suddenly put me in mind of,
so unmistakably did he have, fleetingly, the features, the expression,
the smile of one, was a woman!

I was about once again to move so that he should not catch sight of me;
I had neither the time nor the need. For what did I see! Face to face,
in this courtyard where they had certainly never encountered one another
before (M. de Charlus coming to the Guermantes _hôtel_ only in the
afternoons, at times when Jupien was at his office), the Baron, his
half-closed eyes all of a sudden opened wide, was gazing with an
extraordinary intentness at the former waistcoat-maker on the doorstep
of his shop, while the latter, standing suddenly transfixed in front of
M. de Charlus, rooted like a plant, was contemplating with an air of
wonderment the ageing Baron’s embonpoint. But, what was even more
astonishing, M. de Charlus’s attitude having changed, that of Jupien was
at once made to harmonize with it, as if in accordance with the laws of
some secret art. The Baron, who was seeking now to disguise the
impression he had felt, and who, for all his feigned indifference,
seemed to be moving away only with regret, came and went, stared off
into space in the manner that he believed best brought out the beauty of
his eyes, and had assumed a self-satisfied, casual and ridiculous
expression. Jupien meanwhile, at once shedding the humble, kindly
expression I had always seen him wear, had – in perfect symmetry with
the Baron – drawn back his head, set his torso at an advantageous angle,
placed his fist on his hip with a grotesque impertinence and made his
behind stick out, striking poses with the coquettishness that the orchid
might have had for the providential advent of the bumblebee. I had not
know he could look so unsympathetic. But nor had I known that he was
capable of playing his part impromptu in this sort of scene between two
deaf mutes, which (although he found himself in the presence of M. de
Charlus for the first time) seemed to have been long rehearsed; we
arrive at such perfection spontaneously only when meeting with a
compatriot abroad, with whom understanding then comes of its own accord,
the interpreter being one and the same, without ever having set eyes on
one another before.

This scene was not positively comical, however, it was imbued with a
strangeness, or if you like a naturalness, the beauty of which continued
to grow. For all that M. de Charlus had tried to assume a detached air,
distractedly lowering his eyelids, every now and again he would raise
them again and give Julien an attentive glance. But (no doubt because he
thought that a scene such as this could not be prolonged indefinitely in
this place, either for reasons that will be understood in due course, or
else out of that sense of the brevity of all things which means that we
want every blow to strike home, and makes of any love affair a most
affecting spectacle), each time M. de Charlus looked at Jupien, he saw
to it that the look was accompanied by a word or two, which made it
infinitely unlike the looks normally directed at someone whom we know or
do not know; he gazed at Jupien with the peculiar fixity of someone who
is about to say to you: ‘Forgive my butting in, but you have a long
white thread hanging down your back,’ or else, ‘I can’t be mistaken, you
must be from Zürich, too, I fancy indeed I’ve often met you at the
antique dealer’s.’ Thus, every two minutes, the same question seemed to
be being posed to Jupien with intensity by M. de Charlus’s oglings, like
those interrogative phrases in Beethoven, repeated indefinitely at equal
intervals, and intended – with an exaggerated luxury of preparation – to
bring in a new theme, a change of key, a ‘re-entry’. But the beauty of
M. de Charlus’s and Jupien’s glances came, on the contrary, from the
very fact that, provisionally at least, these glances did not seem to
have as their aim to lead to anything. It was the first time I had seen
the Baron and Jupien manifest this beauty. In the eyes of both, it was
the sky, not of Zürich, but of some Oriental city whose name I had not
as yet divined, which had just arisen. Whatever the point that was able
to detain M. de Charlus and the waistcoat-maker, agreement seemed to
have been reached between them and these useless glances to be no more
than the ritual preliminaries, like the entertainments given before a
marriage that has been agreed on. Closer still to nature – and the
multiplicity of these comparisons is itself all the more natural in
that, examined over the course of a few minutes, the same man seems
successively to be a man, a man-bird, or a man-insect, and so on – it
was like two birds, the male and the female, the male seeking to
advance, the female – Jupien – making no sign in response to this
manoeuvre, but looking at her new friend without surprise, with an
inattentive fixity, adjudged more disturbing no doubt and alone of use,
from the moment that the male had made the first moves, and contenting
herself with preening her feathers. Finally, Jupien’s indifference no
longer seemed to be enough for him; from the certainty of having made a
conquest to getting himself pursued and desired was but a short step,
and, making up his mind to leave for his work, Jupien went out through
the _porte-cochère_. It was only after turning his head two or three
times, however, that he made his escape into the street, into which the
Baron, fearful of losing the scent (whistling with a devil-may-care
expression, and not without a loud ‘_au revoir_’ to the concierge, who,
half-drunk and entertaining guests in his back kitchen, did not even
hear him), dashed hurriedly out in order to catch him up. At the
selfsame instant that M. de Charlus passed through the gateway whistling
like a fat bumble-bee, another one, a real one this time, entered the
courtyard. Who knows whether it was not the one so long awaited by the
orchid, that had come to bring her the rare pollen without which she
would remain a virgin? But I was distracted from following the insect’s
frolics, for, a minute or two later, Jupien, making a greater claim on
my attention (perhaps in order to collect a package that he later took
away with him and which, in the emotion caused in him by the appearance
of M. de Charlus, he had forgotten, perhaps quite simply for some more
natural reason), Jupien returned, followed by the Baron. The latter,
resolved to precipitate matters, asked the waistcoat-maker for a light,
but immediately remarked: ‘I’m asking you for a light, but I see I’ve
forgotten my cigars.’ The laws of hospitality prevailed over the rules
of flirtation. ‘Come inside, you’ll be given everything you want,’ said
the waistcoat-maker, on whose face disdain gave way to joy. The door of
the shop closed on them and I could no longer hear anything. I had lost
sight of the bumble-bee, I did not know whether it was the insect that
the orchid needed, but I no longer doubted the miraculous possibility of
a very rare insect and a captive flower being conjoined, now that M. de
Charlus (a simple comparison of the providential chances, whatever they
might be, without the least scientific pretension to drawing a parallel
between certain botanical laws and what is sometimes quite wrongly
called homosexuality), who, for years past, had come into this house
only at the times when Jupien was not there, had, through the accident
of Mme de Villeparisis’s indisposition, encountered the waistcoat-maker
and with him, the good fortune reserved for men of the Baron’s kind by
one of those fellow creatures who may even be, as we shall see,
infinitely younger than Jupien and better-looking, the man predestined
so that they may receive their share of sensual pleasure on this earth:
the man who loves only elderly gentlemen.

What I have just said here is anyway what I was to understand only a few
minutes later, however, so closely do these properties of being
invisible adhere to reality, until some circumstance removes them. At
all events, for the time being I was most annoyed no longer to be able
to hear the conversation between the former waistcoat-maker and the
Baron. I then noticed that the shop that was to let was divided from
Jupien’s only by an exceedingly thin partition. To get into it, all I
need do was to return upstairs to our apartment, go to the kitchen,
descend the servants’ staircase as far as the cellars, follow these
internally for the whole width of the courtyard and, having reached the
point in the basement where, only a few months before, the cabinet-maker
had been storing his joinery, and where Jupien was anticipating putting
his coal, climb the few steps that gave access to the interior of the
shop. Thus my whole route would be under cover, I should be seen by no
one. That was the most prudent course. It was not the one that I
adopted, but, keeping along the walls, I circled the courtyard in the
open, trying not to be seen. If I was not seen, I owe it more to chance,
I fancy, than to my good sense. And, supposing there to be one, I can
see three possible reasons for the fact that I came to so rash a
decision, when the cellar route was so safe. My impatience first of all.
Then perhaps an obscure recollection of the scene in Montjouvain, hidden
in front of Mlle Vinteuil’s window.⁴ Indeed, the staging of the things
of this sort that I witnessed was always of the rashest and least
probable nature, as if such revelations had to be the reward only for an
action full of risk, though partly clandestine. Lastly, piece of
childishness that it was, I hardly dare confess to the third reason,
which was, I do believe, unconsciously determining. Since, in order to
follow – and to see contradicted – the military principles of
Saint-Loup, I had been following the Boer War in great detail, I had
been led to reread old accounts of travel and exploration. These
accounts had excited me and I had applied them in my everyday life in
order to give myself more courage. When my attacks had forced me to
remain for several days and several nights on end, not merely without
sleeping, but without lying down, and without drinking or eating, at the
moment when my exhaustion and suffering had become such that I thought I
would never re-emerge from them, I would think of some traveller cast up
on the shore, poisoned by unwholesome plants, shivering with fever in
clothes drenched in sea-water, yet who felt better after a day or two
and resumed his journey at random, in search of some inhabitants or
other, who would perhaps be cannibals. Their example braced me, and gave
me back some hope, and I felt ashamed of having momentarily lost heart.
Thinking of the Boers who, with English armies facing them, were not
afraid to expose themselves at the moment when, before regaining the
bush, they needed to cross a stretch of open country: ‘A fine thing,’ I
thought, ‘that I should be more pusillanimous when the theatre of
operations is merely our own courtyard and when the only steel I, who
have just fought several duels without any fear, on account of the
Dreyfus Affair, have to fear is that of the neighbours’ gaze, who have
better things to do than stare into the courtyard.’

But once I was in the shop, avoiding making even the faintest creak of
the floorboards, realizing that the slightest sound from Jupien’s shop
could be heard from mine, I reflected how imprudent Jupien and M. de
Charlus had been and the extent to which luck had been with them.

I did not dare move. The Guermantes’s groom, taking advantage of their
absence no doubt, had in fact transferred a ladder previously stored in
the coachhouse into the shop where I now found myself. And had I climbed
up on it I could have opened the transom and heard as if I had been in
Jupien’s shop itself. But I was afraid of making a noise. Moreover,
there was no point. I did not even need to regret having taken several
minutes to get into my shop. For to judge by what I heard in the early
stages from Jupien’s, which was simply inarticulate sounds, I assume few
words were uttered. It is true that these sounds were so violent that,
had they not constantly been taken up an octave higher by a parallel
moaning, I might have thought that one person was slitting another’s
throat close beside me and that the murderer and his resuscitated victim
were then taking a bath in order to erase the traces of the crime. From
which I later concluded that if there is one thing as noisy as suffering
it is pleasure, especially when there is added to it – failing the fear
of having children, which could not be the case here, in spite of the
far from convincing example in the _Golden Legend_⁵ – an immediate
concern with cleanliness. Finally, at the end of half an hour or so
(during which time I had surreptitiously hoisted myself up on my ladder
so as to see through the transom, which I did not open), a conversation
was joined. Jupien was energetically refusing the money that M. de
Charlus wanted to give him.

Then M. de Charlus took a step outside the shop. ‘Why do you have your
chin shaved like that, he said to the Baron affectionately. It’s so
handsome, a good beard! – Pah, it’s disgusting!’ replied the Baron. He
still lingered in the doorway, however, and asked Jupien for information
about the neighbourhood. ‘You don’t know anything about the chestnut
vendor on the corner, not on the left, he’s a horror, but on the
even-numbered side, a big, strapping fellow, very dark? And the chemist
opposite, he’s got a very nice cyclist who delivers his medicines.’
These questions no doubt ruffled Jupien, for, drawing himself up in
pique, like a great coquette betrayed, he replied: ‘I can see you’re
inconstant.’ Uttered in a sorrowful, icy and affected tone, this
reproach no doubt found a response in M. de Charlus, who, in order to
erase the bad impression his inquisitiveness had created, addressed an
entreaty to Jupien, too low for me to be able to make out the words,
which would no doubt necessitate their prolonging their stay in the shop
and which sufficiently affected the waistcoat-maker to erase his
suffering, for he stared at the Baron’s face, fat and flushed beneath
his grey hair, with the supremely happy look of someone whose _amour
propre_ has just been profoundly flattered, and, making up his mind to
grant M. de Charlus what the latter had just requested, Jupien, after
one or two remarks lacking in refinement such as ‘You’ve got a fat bum!,
said to the Baron, with an expression at once smiling, emotional,
superior and grateful: All right, come on, you great baby, you!’

‘If I revert to the question of the tram-driver,⁶ M. de Charlus went on
tenaciously, it’s because, aside from anything else, it might provide a
bit of interest for the journey home. Like the caliph who used to roam
Baghdad mistaken for a simple merchant,⁷ I sometimes indeed condescend
to follow some curious young person whose silhouette has amused me.’
Here I made the same observation as I had made concerning Bergotte. If
ever he had to answer before a court of law, he would use, not the
phrases apt for persuading the judges, but those Bergotte-like phrases
that his peculiar literary temperament prompted in him naturally and
from the employment of which he derived pleasure. Similarly, M. de
Charlus used the same language with the waistcoat-maker as he would have
done with members of society from his own coterie, exaggerating its tics
even, whether because the shyness against which he was struggling to
fight had impelled him to an excess of pride, or because, by preventing
him from being in command of himself (for we are more ill at ease in
front of someone who is not from our own circle), it forced him to
unveil, to lay bare his true nature, which was indeed arrogant and a
little mad, as Mme de Guermantes used to say. ‘In order not to lose the
scent, he went on, I jump like a little schoolmaster, like a
good-looking young doctor, into the same tram as the young person
herself, whom we speak of in the feminine only so as to observe the rule
(just as we say when speaking of a prince: “Is Son Altesse in good
health?”).⁸ If she changes trams, I take, along perhaps with the
microbes of the plague, that unbelievable thing known as a “transfer”, a
number which, although it is being handed to _me_, isn’t always Number
i! In this way I change “carriages” as many as three or four times. I am
sometimes left stranded at eleven o’ clock in the evening at the Gare
d’Orléans, and have to come home! If only it wasn’t just from the Gare
d’Orléans! But one time, for instance, not having been able to get into
conversation earlier, I went as far as Orléans itself, in one of those
frightful carriages where for a view you have, between the triangles of
crochetwork known as “luggage racks”, the photographs of the network’s
chief architectural masterpieces. There was only one seat free, and I
had facing me, for a historical monument, a “view” of Orléans cathedral,
which is the ugliest in France, and as wearisome to gaze at like that
against my will as if I’d been forced to concentrate on its towers in
the glass knob on those optical penholders that give you ophthalmia.⁹ I
got off at Les Aubrais at the same time as my young person where, alas
(when I had been assuming every defect in her bar that of having a
family), her family was waiting on the platform! For consolation, while
waiting for the train that would take me back to Paris, I had only Diane
de Poitiers’s house.¹⁰ It may well have charmed one of my royal
ancestors, I’d have preferred a more living beauty. It’s for that
reason, as a remedy for the tedium of these solitary return journeys,
that I’d rather like to get to know a sleeping-car attendant or the
driver of an omnibus. Anyway, don’t be shocked, the Baron concluded,
it’s all a question of class. With young society men, for example, I
don’t desire any physical possession, but I can’t rest until I’ve
touched them, I don’t mean bodily, but touched some chord in them. Once,
instead of leaving my letters unanswered, a young man never ceases
writing to me, is mine to dispose of morally, I am appeased, or I would
be at least if I wasn’t soon gripped by concern about another one. It’s
rather curious, isn’t it? Talking of young society men, of the ones who
come here, you don’t know any of them?’ ‘No, baby boy. Oh yes, one,
dark, very tall, with a monocle, who’s always laughing and turning
round. – I can’t tell who you mean.’ Jupien completed the portrait, but
M. de Charlus could not manage to discover whose portrait it was, for he
was unaware that the former waistcoat-maker was one of those people,
more numerous than we imagine, who cannot remember the hair-colour of
people they know only slightly. For me, however, who knew of this
infirmity in Jupien and who replaced dark by fair, the portrait seemed
an accurate reference to the Duc de Châtellerault. ‘To get back to the
young men who are not from the lower orders, resumed the Baron, at this
moment my head has been turned by a strange little fellow from the petty
bourgeoisie, intelligent, who displays a prodigious incivility towards
me. He has absolutely no notion of what a prodigious personage I am and
of the microscopic vibrio that he represents. But after all what does it
matter, the little donkey can bray all he likes before my august
bishop’s robe. – Bishop! exclaimed Jupien, who had understood nothing of
the last words that M. de Charlus had just uttered, but who was stunned
by the word bishop. But that hardly goes with religion, he said. – I
have three popes in my family,¹¹ replied M. de Charlus, and the right to
wear red mourning by virtue of a cardinal’s title, the niece of the
Cardinal, my great-uncle, having brought my grandfather the title of
Duke that was substituted for it. I can see you have no ear for
metaphors and are indifferent to the history of France. Moreover,’ he
added, by way less perhaps of a conclusion than of a warning, ‘the
attraction exerted on me by the young persons who avoid me, out of fear,
naturally, for respect alone seals their lips from shouting aloud that
they love me, requires of them an eminent position in society. There
again, their feigned indifference may produce for all that the directly
contrary effect. Foolishly prolonged, it nauseates me. To take an
example from a class you will be more familiar with, when my town house
was being repaired, so as not to provoke jealousy among all the
duchesses vying for the honour of being able to tell me they had given
me lodging, I went to spend a few days at a “hotel”, as they say. One of
the room waiters was known to me, I pointed out to him an intriguing
young “_chasseur_”, who closed carriage doors and who remained
unamenable to my propositions. Exasperated finally, to prove to him that
my intentions were pure, I got them to offer him a ridiculously large
sum merely to come up and talk to me for five minutes in my room. I
waited for him in vain. I then took such a dislike to him that I used to
go out by the service entrance so I wouldn’t see that wicked young
rogue’s pretty little face. I learned later that he’d never got any of
my letters, which had been intercepted, the first by the room waiter who
was envious, the second by the day porter who was virtuous, the third by
the night porter who was in love with the young _chasseur_ and used to
sleep with him at the hour when Diana was rising. But my dislike has
persisted all the same, and were they to serve me up the _chasseur_
simply as game on a silver dish I wgould reject him and be sick. But
there, what a shame, we’ve been speaking of serious matters and now it’s
over between us where what I’d been hoping for is concerned. But you
could be of great service to me, as a go-between; and then no, that idea
in itself puts a bit of spunk back into me and I feel nothing’s yet
over.’

From the very beginning of this scene, a revolution had been effected in
M. de Charlus in my newly opened eyes, as complete and as immediate as
if he had been touched by a magic wand. Up until now, because I had not
understood, I had not seen. Vice (I put it thus for the sake of
linguistic convenience), each person’s vice accompanies him in the same
fashion as the genie who was invisible to men for as long as they were
unaware of his presence. Kindness, double-dealing, reputation, our
social relations do not let themselves be discovered, we carry them
concealed. Ulysses himself did not at first recognize Athena.¹² But the
gods are immediately perceptible to the gods, as like equally soon is to
like, and as M. de Charlus had been to Jupien. Up until now I had found
myself in the same position when confronted by M. de Charlus as an
absent-minded man who, faced by a pregnant woman whose bulging waistline
he has not noticed, persists, while she smilingly repeats to him, ‘Yes,
I’m a little tired at present’, in asking her tactlessly: ‘What’s the
trouble then?’ But should someone say to him ‘She’s expecting’, he
suddenly notices the belly and thereafter sees nothing else. It is
reason that opens our eyes; an error dispelled lends us an extra sense.

Those who do not like to go for examples of this law to the Messieurs de
Charlus of their acquaintance, whom for a very long time they had not
suspected, until that day when, on the smooth surface of an individual
no different from the rest, there have appeared, traced in a hitherto
invisible ink, the characters making up that word beloved of the ancient
Greeks, need only, in order to convince themselves that the world around
them appears at first bare, stripped of the innumerable adornments it
offers to those better informed, remember how many times in their lives
it has happened that they were on the point of committing a gaffe.
Nothing, on this or on that man’s face, devoid of characters as it is,
could have given them to imagine that he was none other than the
brother, or the fiancé, or the lover of a woman of whom they were about
to say: ‘What a cow!’ But then, fortunately, a word whispered to them by
a neighbour arrests the fatal expression on their lips. At once the
words appear, like a Mene, Takel, Upharsin:¹³ he is the fiancé, or he is
the brother, or he is the lover of the woman whom it is not right to
call a ‘cow’ in front of him. And this new notion in itself will entail
a whole regrouping, the withdrawal or promotion of some fraction of the
notions, henceforth complete, we had held concerning the rest of the
family. In M. de Charlus, for all that another creature had been coupled
with him, which differentiated him from other men, like the horse with
the centaur, and that this other creature had formed one with the Baron,
I had never noticed it. Now that the abstraction had been materialized,
this creature, understood at last, had at once lost its capacity to
remain invisible, and the transmutation of M. de Charlus into a new
person was so complete that not only the contrasts in his face and his
voice, but, in retrospect, even the ups and downs in his relationship
with me, all that up until now had appeared incoherent to my mind,
became intelligible, showed itself to be self-evident, just as a
sentence that had presented no meaning for as long as it remained broken
up into letters arranged at random, expresses, if the characters find
themselves restored to their rightful order, a thought we will not again
be able to forget.

Moreover, I understood now why, a moment ago, when I had seen him coming
out from Mme de Villeparisis’s, I had been able to think that M. de
Charlus had the look of a woman: he was one! He belonged to that race of
beings, less contradictory than they appear to be, whose ideal is
virile, precisely because their temperament is feminine, and who are in
life like other men in appearance only; there where each of us carries,
inscribed in the eyes through which we see everything in the universe, a
silhouette intaglioed into the facet of the pupil, for them it is not
that of a nymph, but of an ephebe. A race on which a malediction weighs
and which must live in falsehood and in perjury, because it knows that
its desire, which, for every created being, is life’s sweetest pleasure,
is held to be punishable and shameful, to be inadmissible; which must
deny its God, since, even if Christian, when they stand arraigned at the
bar of the court, they must, before Christ and in his name, defend
themselves, as if from a calumny, from what is their life itself; sons
without a mother, to whom they are obliged to lie even in the hour when
they close her eyes; friends without friendships, notwithstanding all
those that their frequently acknowledged charm inspires and which their
often kindly hearts would respond to; but can we give the name of
friendship to relationships that vegetate only by virtue of a lie and
from which the first impulse of trust and sincerity which they might be
tempted to show would cause them to be rejected in disgust, unless their
dealings are with an impartial, or even a sympathetic spirit, but who
then, misled in their regard by a conventional psychology, will ascribe
to the vice confessed the one affection that is the most alien to it,
just as certain judges presume and excuse murder more readily among
inverts and betrayal among Jews for reasons deriving from original sin
and the fatality of the race? Finally – at least according to the first
theory I had then sketched out, which we shall see being modified in due
course, in which this would have angered them more than anything else
had the contradiction not been hidden from view by the very illusion
that made them see and live – lovers to whom the possibility of that
love, the hope of which gives them the strength to bear so many risks
and so much loneliness, is all but closed, simply because they are much
taken with a man having nothing of the woman about him, with a man who
is not an invert and cannot, in consequence, love them; so that their
desire would be forever unsatisfiable were money not to deliver up real
men to them, and imagination not finally to lead them to mistake the
inverts to whom they have prostituted themselves for real men. Their
only honour is precarious, their only liberty provisional until the
crime be discovered; their only position unstable, as for the poet who
was yesterday being fêted in every drawing-room and applauded in every
theatre in London, only to be driven on the morrow from every
lodging-house, unable to find a pillow on which to lay his head,¹⁴
turning the millstone like Samson and saying, like him: ‘_Les deux sexes
mourront chacun de son côte_’,¹⁵ excluded even, save at times of high
misfortune when the majority rally around the victim, like the Jews
around Dreyfus, from the sympathy – sometimes from the company – of
their own kind, who are disgusted to be made to see themselves as they
are, depicted in a mirror that no longer flatters them but brings out
all the blemishes that they had not wanted to remark in themselves and
makes them understand that what they had been calling their love (to
which, by playing on the word, they had annexed, out of a social sense,
all that poetry, painting, music, chivalry and asceticism have been able
to add to love) stems not from an ideal of beauty that they have chosen,
but from an incurable malady; like the Jews once again (save those few
who wish to associate only with those of their own race, and who have
the ritual words and hallowed jokes constantly on their lips), shunning
one another, seeking out those who are the most opposed to themselves,
who want nothing to do with them, forgiving when rebuffed, elated when
indulged; yet also brought together with their own kind by the ostracism
that afflicts them, the opprobrium into which they have fallen, having
finally acquired, by a persecution similar to that of Israel, the
physical and moral characteristics of a race, sometimes beautiful, often
ghastly, finding (despite all the ridicule that he who mixes more with,
is better assimilated to the opposing race, and is relatively, on the
surface, less inverted, heaps on him who has remained more so) relief in
the frequentation of their own kind, a support even in their existence,
so that, while denying that they are a race (the name of which is the
gravest insult), they willingly unmask those who succeed in concealing
that they belong to it, less in order to hurt them, to which they have
no objection, than to excuse themselves, and going in search, like a
doctor of appendicitis, of inversion, even in history, taking pleasure
in reminding you that Socrates was one of them, just as the Israelites
tell you that Jesus was a Jew, without reflecting that no one was
abnormal when homosexuality was the norm, no one anti-Christian before
Christ, that opprobrium alone makes the crime, for it has allowed to
survive only those who were recalcitrant to all preaching, all example,
all punishment, by virtue of an innate disposition so special that it
repels other men more (even though it may be accompanied by lofty moral
qualities) than certain vices which contradict it such as theft,
cruelty, or bad faith, which are better understood and thus more readily
excused by the common run of men; forming a freemasonry far more
extensive, more effective and less suspected than that of the lodges,
for it rests on an identity of tastes, of needs, of habits, of dangers,
of apprenticeship, of knowledge, of commerce and of vocabulary, in which
even the members who do not wish to know one another at once recognize
one another by natural or conventional signs, whether involuntary or
deliberate, which indicate to the beggar one of his own kind in the
great nobleman whose carriage door he is closing, to the father in his
daughter’s fiancé, to the man who had wanted to be cured, or to confess,
or to be defended, in the doctor or the priest or the advocate of whom
he has gone in search; all of them obliged to protect their secret, yet
having their share in a secret of others which the rest of humanity does
not suspect and which means that for them the most improbable
cloak-and-dagger stories seem true; for in this fabulous, anachronistic
life, the ambassador is friends with the convict; the prince, with a
certain freedom of manner lent him by his aristocratic upbringing, which
no fearful petty bourgeois could have, when he comes out from the
duchess, goes off to confer with the ruffian; a reprobate portion of the
human collectivity, but a significant portion, suspected in places where
it is not, flaunted, insolent, unpunished in places where it goes
undetected; numbering adherents everywhere, among the common people, in
the army, in the temple, in prison, on the throne; living finally, a
great number of them at least, in a dangerous, caressing intimacy with
the men of the other race, provoking them, playing with them by speaking
of their vice as if it were not theirs, a game made easy by the
blindness or falseness of the others, a game that may be prolonged for
years up until the day of the scandal when these animal-tamers are
devoured; obliged until then to keep their lives hidden, to avert their
gaze from where they would like to be fixing it, to fix their gaze on
what they would like to avert it from, to change the gender of many of
the adjectives in their vocabulary, a small social constraint compared
with the inner constraint that their vice, or what is improperly so
called, imposes on them, in respect no longer of others but of
themselves, and in such a way that it does not appear to them to be a
vice. But some, more practical, more impatient, who do not have time to
go and do their own bargaining or to give up the simplification of their
lives and the saving in time that can result from co-operation, have
created two societies, the second of which is made up exclusively of
people like themselves.

This is striking among those who are poor and have come from the
provinces, without connections, with nothing but the ambition of one day
becoming a doctor or a celebrated advocate, having a mind as yet empty
of opinions, and a body devoid of graces which they expect rapidly to
adorn, just as, for their little room in the Latin Quarter, they would
buy furniture according to what they have observed and copied among
those who have already ‘arrived’ in the serious and useful profession in
which they hope to enrol and to become famous; with these, their special
proclivity, inherited without their knowing, like an aptitude for
drawing, for music, or for blindness, is perhaps their one deep-rooted,
despotic originality – which on certain evenings forces them to miss
some meeting or other useful to their careers with people whose manner
of speaking, of thinking, of dressing, of doing their hair they have on
the other hand adopted. In their own neighbourhood, where they otherwise
associate only with their fellow disciples, their mentors or some
compatriot who has arrived and taken them under his wing, they have soon
come across other young men drawn to them by the same peculiar
proclivity, just as in a small town the fifth-form teacher and the
notary become friends, who both love chamber music or medieval ivories;
applying to the object of their hobby the same utilitarian instinct, and
the same professional spirit that guides them in their careers, they
meet with them at occasions to which laymen are not admitted, any more
than to those which bring together connoisseurs of old snuff-boxes,
Japanese prints or rare flowers, and at which, because of the pleasure
of learning something new, the usefulness of the exchanges and the fear
of competition, there reigns, as at a stamp market, at once the close
understanding of specialists and the fierce rivalry of collectors. No
one, moreover, in the café where they have their table knows what the
meeting is, whether of an angling club, of sub-editors, or of sons of
the Indre,¹⁶ so correct is their costume, so cold and reserved their
expression, and so guarded the only glances they dare to give at the
fashionable young men, the young ‘lions’, who, a few yards away, are
sounding off about their mistresses, and among whom those who admire
them without daring to look up will learn only twenty years later, when
some will be on the eve of entering an academy, and others old men in a
club, that the most seductive, now a fat and greying Charlus, was in
actual fact like themselves, but elsewhere, in another world, beneath
other external symbols, with alien signs, the difference of which has
led them into error. But these groupings are more or less advanced; and
just as the ‘Union des Gauches’ differs from the ‘Fédération
socialiste’¹⁷ and this or that Mendelssohn Society from the Schola
Cantorum,¹⁸ so on certain evenings, at another table, there are
extremists who allow a bracelet to protrude from beneath their cuff, or
sometimes a necklace in the opening of their collar, who, by their
insistent glances, their giggling, their laughter and their mutual
caresses, force a band of schoolboys to take to their heels, and who are
served, with a politeness beneath which there broods indignation, by a
waiter who, as on the evenings when he serves Dreyfusards, would delight
in going off to fetch the police were it not to his advantage to pocket
the tips.

It is to these professional organizations that the mind opposes the
taste of the solitaries, and without too much artifice in one respect,
since in so doing it is only imitating the solitaries themselves, who
believe that nothing differs more from organized vice than what appears
to them a misunderstood love, yet with some artifice nonetheless, for
these different classes correspond, every bit as much as to diverse
physiological types, to successive moments in a pathological or merely
social evolution. Indeed, it is only very rarely that the solitaries do
not, sooner or later, merge into organizations such as these, sometimes
out of simple fatigue, or out of convenience ( just as those who have
been the most opposed to it end up installing the telephone, by
receiving the Iénas or by shopping at Potin’s).¹⁹ They are generally
none too well received there, however, for, in their relatively pure
lives, the lack of experience, the saturation by daydreams to which they
are reduced, have brought out more strongly in them those signs peculiar
to effeminacy that the professionals have sought to erase. And it has to
be admitted that with some of these newcomers, the woman is not merely
one with the man inwardly, but hideously apparent, agitated as they are
in some hysterical spasm by a shrill laugh that convulses their knees
and their hands, and no more resembling the common run of men than those
monkeys, with their melancholy, dark-ringed eyes and prehensile feet,
which put on dinner jackets and wear a black tie; with the result that
these new recruits are deemed, and by those less chaste moreover, to be
compromising company, and hard of admission; they are accepted, however,
and they benefit then from the facilities by which commerce, the great
enterprises, have transformed the lives of individuals, have brought
within reach commodities hitherto too costly to acquire or even hard to
find, but which now submerge them in a plethora of what, on their own,
they had been unable to discover in the largest crowds. Yet, even with
these innumerable outlets, the social constraint still weighs too
heavily on some, who are recruited chiefly from among those in whom no
mental constraint has been exercised and who still hold their kind of
love to be more uncommon than it is. Let us leave aside for the time
being those who, led by the exceptional nature of their inclination to
believe themselves superior to women, despise them, who make of
homosexuality the privilege of great geniuses and of glorious epochs,
and who, when they seek to share their taste with others, do so less
with those who seem predisposed to it, as a morphinomane does with
morphine, than with those who seem to them worthy of it, out of an
apostolic zeal, just as others preach Zionism, conscientious objection,
Saint-Simonism,²⁰ vegetarianism or anarchy. Some, if you come on them
unawares in the morning, still in bed, display an admirable woman’s
head, so general is the expression and symbolic of the sex as a whole;
the hair itself declares it; its inflection is so feminine, when
loosened, it falls so naturally on the cheek in tresses, that you marvel
that the young woman, the girl, Galatea,²¹ barely awake as yet in the
unconscious of this man’s body in which she is imprisoned, should have
been able so ingeniously, of her own accord, without having been taught
by anyone, to take advantage of the humblest escape route from her
prison and find what was necessary to her life. The young man whose
delectable head this is doubtless does not say: ‘I am a woman.’ Even if
– for so many possible reasons – he lives with a woman, he may deny to
her that he is one, may swear that he has never had relations with a
man. Let her look at him as we have just shown him, lying in a bed, in
pyjamas, his arms bare, his neck bare beneath his black hair. The
pyjamas have become a woman’s shift, the head that of a pretty Spanish
woman. The mistress is appalled by the confidences entrusted to her
gaze, truer than any words could be, or even actions, and which actions
moreover, if they have not done so already, will not fail to confirm,
for every human being pursues his own pleasure; and if this human being
is not too vicious, he seeks it in a sex opposite to his own. But for
the invert vice begins, not when he establishes a relationship (for too
many reasons may govern that), but when he takes his pleasure with
women. The young man whom we have just tried to depict was so obviously
a woman, that the women who looked longingly at him were doomed (for
lack of a particular proclivity) to the same disappointment as those
who, in Shakespeare’s comedies, are taken in by a young girl in disguise
who passes herself off as an adolescent boy. The deception is the same,
the invert knows it even, he can guess at the disillusionment the woman
will experience once the travesty is removed, and senses how rich a
source of poetic fancy it is, this mistake over gender. Moreover, for
all that he may not confess, even to his exigent mistress (unless she is
a citizen of Gomorrah), ‘I am a woman,’ with what stratagems, and what
agility, will the unconscious yet visible woman within not seek out the
masculine organ, with the obstinacy of a climbing plant! You have only
to look at those curly tresses against the white pillow to understand
that, in the evenings, if this young man slips from his parents’
fingers, in spite of them, in spite of himself, it will not be to go to
meet with women. His mistress may castigate him, may turn the key on
him, the next day the man-woman will have found the means of attaching
himself to a man, just as the convolvulus throws out its tendrils
wherever a hoe or a rake is to be found. Why, admiring in this man’s
face a delicacy that touches us, a grace and a natural affability such
as men do not have, should we be distressed to learn that this young man
seeks out boxers? These are different aspects of the one reality. And
the aspect that repels us is in fact the most touching, more touching
than all the delicacy, for it represents an admirable unconscious effort
on the part of nature: the recognition of the sex by itself, despite
that sex’s deceptions, appears as the unavowed attempt to break out
towards what an initial error on society’s part has set far away from
it. Some, those whose childhoods were the most self-conscious no doubt,
hardly concern themselves with what sort of physical pleasure they
receive, provided they can relate it to a masculine face. Whereas
others, whose senses are no doubt more violent, give imperious
localization to their physical pleasures. The confessions of these last
would perhaps shock the world at large. They live less exclusively
beneath the satellite of Saturn perhaps,²² because for them women are
not altogether excluded as they are for the first kind, with regard to
whom they would not exist were it not for conversation, flirtation and
love in the head. But the second kind seek out the women who love women,
who can procure a young man for them and add to the pleasure which they
get from finding themselves with him; much more, they can, in the same
way, find the same pleasure with them as with a man. Whence it is that,
in the case of those who love the first kind, jealousy is excited only
by the pleasure they might be finding with a man and which alone seems
to them a betrayal, since they have no part in the love of women, have
practised it only out of habit and so as to preserve the possibility of
marriage, so little picturing to themselves the pleasure it may afford
that they cannot bear for the man they love to enjoy it; whereas the
second kind often inspire jealousy by their love affairs with women. For
in the relationships they have with them, they play the role of another
woman for the women who love women, and the woman offers them at the
same time more or less what they find in a man, so that the jealous
friend suffers from feeling that the man he loves is inseparable from
the woman who is for him almost a man, at the same time as he feels him
almost escaping from him, because, for these women, he is something he
does not know, a sort of woman. Let us not speak either of those young
madmen who, out of a sort of childishness, in order to tease their
friends or shock their parents, display a sort of fury in choosing
clothes that look like dresses, in reddening their lips and blacking
their eyes; let us leave them aside, for it is they whom we shall meet
with again, once they have too cruelly paid the penalty for their
affectation, spending a whole lifetime trying vainly to make reparation,
by their severe, protestant demeanour, for the wrong they did themselves
when they were carried away by the same demon that drives young women in
the Faubourg Saint-Germain to live in a scandalous fashion, to break
with all custom, to flout their families, up until the day when they set
out perseveringly but unavailingly to reascend the slope that they had
found such amusement in, or rather had been unable to stop themselves
from descending. Let us leave until later finally those who have
concluded a pact with Gomorrah. We shall speak of them when M. de
Charlus comes to know them. Let us leave all those, of one variety or
another, who will appear in their turn, and, to bring this first exposé
to an end, say a word only about those of whom we began to speak a
little earlier, the solitaries. Holding their vice to be more of an
exception than it is, they have gone off to live on their own on the day
when they discovered it, having long borne it without recognizing it,
longer merely than others. For no one knows right away that he is an
invert, or a poet, or a snob, or a miscreant. The schoolboy who was
learning love poetry or looking at obscene pictures, if he then pressed
up against a classmate, merely imagined that he was communing with him
in the same desire for a woman. How could he believe that he was not
like everyone else, when he recognizes the substance of what he feels in
reading Mme de Lafayette, Racine, Baudelaire, Walter Scott, at a time
when he is as yet too little able to observe himself to appreciate what
he is adding to it of his own making, and that if the sentiment is the
same its object is different, that what he desires is Rob Roy and not
Diana Vernon?²³ With many of them, out of a prudent defensive instinct
that precedes the clearer view of the intelligence, the mirror and walls
of their room vanish beneath cheap colour prints of actresses; they
write verses such as

_Chloë is the one for whom I care,_

_She is divine, a girl so fair,_

_Such love for her my heart doth bear._

Must we on this account set at the beginning of these lives a taste not
to be met with again in them subsequently, like the blond curls of the
children who will later become the darkest? Who knows whether the
photographs of women are not a beginning of hypocrisy, and a beginning
also of horror for the other inverts? But the solitaries are the very
ones for whom hypocrisy is painful. Perhaps even the example of the
Jews, of a different colony, is not strong enough to explain how weak a
hold upbringing has over them, and with what artistry they succeed in
reverting, not perhaps to something as simply atrocious as suicide (to
which, whatever precautions we may take, madmen revert, and, having been
rescued from the river into which they had thrown themselves, take
poison, procure a revolver, and so on), but to a life which not only can
the men of the other race not understand or imagine, loathing its
necessary pleasures, but whose frequent danger and permanent shame would
fill them with horror. In order to depict them, we need perhaps to
think, if not of those animals that can not be domesticated, then of
lion cubs supposedly tamed yet which are lions still, or at least of
blacks, who are driven to despair by the comfortable existence of whites
and prefer the risks of the uncivilized life and its incomprehensible
joys. The day having come when they discover themselves to be incapable
at once of lying to others and of lying to themselves, they go off to
live in the country, fleeing their own kind (whom they believe to be few
in number) out of horror at the monstrosity or fear of temptation, and
the rest of humanity out of shame. Having never achieved genuine
maturity, and having lapsed into melancholy, from time to time, on a
Sunday when there is no moon, they take a walk along a lane as far as a
crossroads where, without a single word having passed between them, one
of their childhood friends who lives in a nearby château has come to
wait for them. And they take up the games of old once again, on the
grass, in the darkness, without exchanging a word. During the week, they
meet in one another’s houses, chat about this or that, without referring
to what has taken place, exactly as if they had not done anything and
were never going to do anything again, except, in their dealings, for a
hint of coldness, of irony, of irritability, of resentment, and
sometimes of hatred. Then the neighbour leaves on an arduous journey on
horseback or by mule, scaling mountain peaks and sleeping in the snow;
his friend, who identifies his own vice with a weakness of temperament,
with his timid, home-loving life, realizes that the vice will not be
able to survive in his emancipated friend, at so many thousands of
metres above sea-level. And indeed, the other gets married. The
abandoned one is not cured, however (in spite of the cases in which we
shall see that inversion is curable). He insists on taking in the fresh
cream himself in the mornings, in his kitchen, from the hands of the
dairy-boy and, on those evenings when he is too troubled by desire, he
forgets himself to the extent of setting a drunkard back on his right
road or straightening the blind man’s blouse. No doubt the life of some
inverts seems sometimes to change, and their vice (as we say) no longer
shows in their habits; but nothing has been lost: a hidden jewel is
recovered; when the quantity of urine decreases in an invalid, it is
good that he should perspire more, but the excretion must still take
place. One day this homosexual loses a young cousin, and, by his
inconsolable grief, you realize that it was into this love, chaste
perhaps and which had more to do with preserving esteem than obtaining
possession, his desires had passed by a transference, just as, in a
budget, certain expenses can be carried over into another financial year
without affecting the total. As with those invalids in whom an attack of
urticaria causes their habitual ailments to disappear for a time, so, in
the invert, a pure love felt for a young relative seems momentarily to
have replaced, by metastasis, habits that will sooner or later once
again take the place of the vicarious, now cured sickness.

Meanwhile, the solitary’s married neighbour has returned; faced with the
beauty of the young wife and the affection shown her by her husband, on
the day when the friend is obliged to invite them to dinner, he feels
shame for the past. Already in an interesting condition, she has to go
home early, leaving her husband behind; the latter, when the time comes
to go home, asks to be taken some of the way by his friend, who is not
at first touched by any suspicion but who then at the crossroads finds
himself being thrown down on the grass, without a word, by the
mountaineer soon to be a father. And the encounters recommence, up until
the day when one of the young wife’s male cousins comes and settles not
far away, with whom the husband is now always going off. And should the
abandoned one call and try to get close to him, the latter pushes him
furiously away, indignant that the other should not have had the tact to
sense the dislike he will from now on inspire. One time, however, a
stranger presents himself, sent by the unfaithful neighbour; but the
abandoned one is too busy and can not receive him, and realizes only
afterwards with what object the stranger had come.

Then the solitary languishes alone. He has no pleasure other than going
to the nearby seaside resort to ask for information from a certain
railwayman. But the latter has been given promotion, and been posted to
the other end of France; the solitary will no longer be able to go and
ask him the times of the trains or the price of a first-class ticket,
and before returning home to dream in his tower, like Griselda,²⁴ he
lingers on the beach, like some strange Andromeda whom no Argonaut will
come to deliver, like a sterile jellyfish that will perish on the sand,
or else he remains idly on the platform, before the departure of the
train, casting glances at the crowd of passengers that will seem
indifferent, disdainful or distracted to those of another race, but
which, like the brilliant luminescence with which certain insects adorn
themselves to attract those of the same species, or like the nectar that
certain flowers offer to attract the insects that will fertilize them,
would not deceive the adept, almost impossible to find, of a pleasure
too singular, too difficult to place, that is being offered to him, the
confrère with whom our specialist might speak the unusual tongue; at
most, some scarecrow on the platform will feign interest, but solely for
material gain, like those who, at the Collège de France, in the hall
where the professor of Sanskrit is speaking without any hearers, will
follow the lecture, but only in order to get warm. Jellyfish! Orchid!
When I was following only my own instinct, the jellyfish repelled me at
Balbec; but had I known how to look at it, like Michelet,²⁵ from the
point of view of natural history and of aesthetics, I would have seen a
delectable girandole of azure. Are they not, with the transparent velvet
of their petals, like the mauve orchids of the sea? Like so many
creatures of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, like the plant that
would produce vanilla, but which, because, in it, the male organ is
divided by a septum from the female organ, remains sterile unless
humming-birds or certain small bees transport the pollen from one to the
other, or unless man fertilizes them artificially, M. de Charlus (and
here the word fertilization must be taken in its moral sense, since in
the physical sense the union of male with male is sterile, but it
matters that an individual should be able to meet with the one pleasure
he is capable of enjoying, and that ‘here below every soul’ can give
someone ‘its music, its flame or its fragrance’),²⁶ M. de Charlus was
one of those men who may be called exceptional, because, however
numerous they may be, the satisfaction, so simple with others, of their
sexual needs depends on the coincidence of too many conditions, too
difficult to encounter. For men like M. de Charlus (allowance being made
for the accommodations that will gradually appear and of which a hint
may already have been given, demanded by the need for pleasure that
resigns itself to a half-consent), a mutual love adds to the very great,
at times insurmountable, difficulties it encounters among the common run
of individuals, ones of its own so particular that what is always very
rare for anyone at all becomes in their case almost impossible, and
should a truly happy encounter transpire, or one that nature makes to
seem so, their happiness, far more even than that of the normal lover,
has something extraordinary, something selective, something profoundly
necessary about it. The hatred of the Montagus and the Capulets²⁷ was as
nothing compared with the impediments of every kind that have been
overcome, the special eliminations to which nature must have subjected
the already far from common chances that lead on to love, before a
former maker of waistcoats, who had been anticipating setting quietly
off for his office, should reel about, bedazzled, in front of a
fifty-year-old man with a pot belly. This Romeo and this Juliet have
good cause to believe that their love is not a momentary whim, but truly
predestined, prepared for by the harmonies of their temperament, and not
only by their own temperament but by that of their forebears, of their
most remote heredity, so that the fellow-creature now conjoined to them
belongs to them from before birth, has attracted them by a force
comparable to that which governs the worlds in which we have spent our
previous lives. M. de Charlus had distracted me from looking to see
whether the bumble-bee had brought the orchid the pollen it had been
awaiting for so long, and that it had the good fortune to receive only
thanks to a chance so improbable it might be called a sort of miracle.
But it was a miracle also which I had just witnessed, of almost the same
kind, and no less marvellous. As soon as I had considered the encounter
from this point of view, everything about it seemed imbued with beauty.
The most extraordinary stratagems that nature has invented to force
insects to ensure the fertilization of flowers which could otherwise not
be so, for the male flower is too far removed from the female flower, or
that which, if it is the wind that must ensure the transporting of the
pollen, makes it much easier to detach from the male flower and much
simpler for the female flower to trap it as it passes, by suppressing
the secretion of the nectar, which is no longer of use since there are
no insects to attract, and even the brilliance of the corollas that
attract them, and the stratagem which, so that the flower may be
reserved for the pollen it requires, which can fructify in it alone,
causes it to secrete a liquid that immunizes it against other pollens –
seemed to me no more marvellous than the existence of the sub-variety of
inverts destined to ensure the pleasures of love to the invert who is
growing old: of the men who are attracted, not by all men, but – through
a phenomenon of correspondence and of harmony comparable to those that
govern the fertilization of such heterostyled, trimorphic flowers as
_Lythrum salicaria_ – only by men much older than themselves. Jupien had
just offered me an example of this sub-variety, though one less striking
than others which any human herborist, any moral botanist, will be able
to observe, despite their rarity, and which will present them with a
frail young man awaiting the advances of a robust, pot-bellied
fifty-year-old, and remaining indifferent to the advances of other young
men, just as the short-styled hermaphroditic flowers of _Primula veris_
remain sterile for as long as they are being fertilized only by other
likewise short-styled _Primula veris_, whereas they welcome with delight
the pollen from the long-styled _Primula veris_.²⁸ Where M. de Charlus
was concerned, however, I came to realize subsequently that for him
there were various kinds of conjunction, certain of which, by their
multiplicity, their barely perceptible instantaneity, and especially the
absence of contact between the two agents, were even more reminiscent of
those flowers which in a garden are fertilized by the pollen from a
neighbouring flower that they will never touch. There were indeed
certain individuals that he found it enough to have come to him, and to
hold them for a few hours under the sway of his tongue, for the desire
kindled in him by some encounter to be appeased. Merely with words the
conjunction was made, as easily as may happen among the Infusoria. On
occasions, as had no doubt transpired in my own case on the evening when
I had been summoned by him after the Guermantes dinner-party,
assuagement came about thanks to a violent dressing-down cast by the
Baron into his visitor’s face, just as certain flowers, thanks to a
spring-mechanism, spray the unconsciously complicit, disconcerted insect
from a distance. M. de Charlus had passed from being the dominated to
the dominator, and, feeling himself calmed and purged of his anxiety,
dismissed the visitor he had at once ceased to find desirable. Finally,
inversion itself arising from the fact that the invert approximates too
closely to a woman to be able to have useful relations with her, it is
thereby linked to a higher law which means that so many hermaphroditic
flowers remain infertile, that is to the sterility of
self-fertilization. It is true that inverts in search of a male are
often content with an invert as effeminate as themselves. But it is
enough that they should not belong to the feminine sex, of which they
have inside them an embryo they are unable to make use of, as occurs
with so many hermaphroditic flowers and even certain hermaphroditic
animals, like the snail, which cannot be fertilized by themselves, but
can be so by other hermaphrodites. Hence inverts, who readily link
themselves to the ancient East or the golden age of Greece, might go
further back still, to those experimental epochs when neither dioecious
flowers or unisexual animals existed, to that initial hermaphroditism of
which a few rudimentary male organs in the female anatomy and female
organs in the male anatomy appear to conserve the trace.²⁹ I found the
mimicry of Jupien and M. de Charlus, incomprehensible to me at the
outset, as curious as those gestures of enticement addressed to insects,
according to Darwin, by the flowers known as composites, which raise the
florets of their capitula so as to be seen from further away, like a
certain heterostyled flower which turns its stamens over and arches them
in order to clear a path for insects, or which offers them an ablution,
or quite simply, like the fragrance of the nectar, the brilliance of its
corollas, which were at that very moment attracting insects into the
courtyard. From that day forward, M. de Charlus was to alter the time of
his visits to Mme de Villeparisis, not that he would have been unable to
meet Jupien elsewhere, and more conveniently, but, just as they were for
me, the afternoon sunlight and the flowering shrub were no doubt linked
to his memory. He did not content himself, moreover, with recommending
the Jupiens to Mme de Villeparisis, to the Duchesse de Guermantes and to
a whole brilliant clientèle who were all the more attentive to the young
embroideress inasmuch as the few ladies who had resisted or merely taken
their time were the object of terrible reprisals on the part of the
Baron, either so that they might serve as an example, or because they
had excited his fury and stood up against his efforts at domination. He
made Jupien’s position more and more lucrative until finally he took him
on as a secretary and set him up in the conditions in which we shall
meet him later on. ‘Oh, that Jupien’s one very lucky man,’ said
Françoise, who had a tendency to play down or to exaggerate kindnesses
according to whether they were shown to her or to others. This time,
however, she had no need to exaggerate nor, moreover, did she feel any
envy, being genuinely fond of Jupien. ‘Oh, the Baron’s such a good man,
she added, so respectable, so devout, so correct! If I had a daughter to
marry off, and came from the world of the rich, I’d give her to the
Baron with my eyes shut. – But Françoise,’ said my mother gently, she’d
have lots of husbands, that daughter. Remember, you already promised her
to Jupien. – Oh heavens, so I did, answered Françoise, the fact is he’s
someone else who’d make a woman very happy. It’s all very well there
being rich and dirt poor, that doesn’t make you what you are. The Baron
and Jupien, they’re two of a kind right enough.’

Faced by this initial revelation, I had greatly exaggerated the elective
nature of so selective a conjunction. True, each of the men of M. de
Charlus’s kind is an extraordinary creature, since, if he makes no
concessions to life’s possibilities, he searches essentially for the
love of a man of the other race, that is of a man who loves women (and
who in consequence will not be able to love him); contrary to what I
believed in the courtyard, where I had just seen Jupien circling around
M. de Charlus like the orchid making advances to the bumble-bee, these
exceptional beings for whom we feel pity are legion, as we shall see in
the course of the present work, for a reason that will be disclosed only
at the end, and they complain themselves of being too many rather than
too few. For the two angels who were posted at the gates of Sodom to
learn whether its inhabitants, says Genesis, had done every one of the
things report of which had risen as far as the Eternal, had been, and we
can but rejoice at the fact, very ill chosen by the Lord God, who ought
to have entrusted the task only to a Sodomist. He would not have been
led benevolently to lower the flaming sword or temper the sanctions by
the excuses, ‘Father of six children, I have two mistresses, etc.’ He
would have answered: ‘Yes, and your wife suffers the torments of
jealousy. But even if these women were not chosen by you in Gomorrah,
you spend your nights with a keeper of flocks from Hebron.’ And he would
immediately have made him retrace his steps towards the town about to be
destroyed by the rain of fire and brimstone. On the contrary, all the
shameful Sodomists were allowed to flee, even if, on catching sight of a
young boy, they looked away, like Lot’s wife, without thereby being
turned as she was into pillars of salt.³⁰ With the result that they had
a numerous posterity, among whom this gesture has remained habitual,
like that of those debauched women who, while appearing to stare at a
display of shoes in a shop window, look round at a student. These
descendants of the Sodomists, so numerous that another verse of Genesis
may be applied to them, ‘So that if a man be able to number the dust of
the earth, so thy seed also shall be numbered,’³¹ have established
themselves over the whole earth, they have had access to all the
professions and gain admission so readily to the most exclusive clubs
that, when a sodomist is not admitted, the black balls are in the
majority those of the sodomists, but who take care to incriminate
sodomy, having inherited the lie that enabled their ancestors to leave
the accursed city. It is possible that they will return there one day.
Certainly, they form in every country a colony at once Oriental,
cultivated, musical and slanderous, which has charming virtues and
unbearable defects. A more thorough picture of them will emerge in the
course of the ensuing pages, but I have wanted provisionally to
forestall the fatal error that would consist, just as a Zionist movement
has been encouraged, in creating a sodomist movement and in rebuilding
Sodom. But, no sooner arrived there and the sodomists would be leaving
the town so as to appear not to belong to it, would take a wife, would
keep mistresses in other cities where they would find, moreover, all the
appropriate amusements. They would go to Sodom only on days of supreme
necessity, when their own town would be empty, at those times when
hunger brings the wolf out from the woods, that is to say that
everything would proceed in sum as in London, Berlin, Rome, Petrograd³²
or Paris.

At all events, on that particular day, before my visit to the Duchesse,
I was not thinking so far ahead and was distressed at having, by
attending to the Jupien–Charlus conjunction, perhaps missed the
fertilization of the flower by the bumble-bee.


PART II



CHAPTER 1


_M. de Charlus in society – A doctor – Characteristic face of Mme de
Vaugoubert – Mme d’Arpajon, the Hubert Robert fountain and the merriment
of Grand-Duke Vladimir – Mme d’Amoncourt, Mme de Citri, Mme de
Saint-Euverte, etc – Curious conversation between Swann and the Prince
de Guermantes – Albertine on the telephone – Visits while awaiting my
second and last stay in Balbec – Arrival in Balbec – Jealousy with
regard to Albertine – The intermittences of the heart._

As I was not in any hurry to arrive at the Guermantes soirée, to which I
was not certain of having been invited, I whiled away the time outside;
but the summer daylight seemed in no greater haste to move than I was.
Although it was after nine o’clock, the daylight it was still which, on
the place de la Concorde, had given to the Luxor obelisk an appearance
of pink nougat. Then it modified the tint and turned it into a metallic
substance, with the result that the obelisk did not merely become more
precious, but seemed thinner and almost flexible. You fancied that you
might have been able to twist it, that this jewel had already been bent
slightly out of true perhaps. The moon was in the sky now like a quarter
of orange, delicately peeled but with a small bite out of it. Later it
would be made of the most resistant gold. Huddled all alone behind it, a
poor little star was about to serve as the solitary moon’s one
companion, while the latter, even as it shielded its friend, but more
daring and going on ahead, would brandish, like an irresistible weapon,
like a symbol of the Orient, its marvellous, ample golden cresent.

In front of the Princesse de Guermantes’s _hôtel_, I met the Duc de
Châtellerault; I no longer remembered that half an hour before I was
still haunted by the fear – which was soon indeed to take hold of me
again – of coming without having been invited. We feel uneasy, and it is
sometimes long after the moment of danger, forgotten thanks to our
distraction, that we remember our unease. I said good day to the young
Duc and made my way into the house. But here I must first note a
trifling circumstance which will enable a fact that will follow shortly
to be understood.

On that, as on the preceding evenings, there was someone who had the Duc
de Châtellerault very much on his mind, without, however, suspecting who
he was: this was Mme de Guermantes’s doorman (known in those days as the
‘barker’). M. de Châtellerault, very far from being an intimate – as he
was of the cousins – of the Princesse, was being received in her
drawing-room for the first time. His parents, who had quarrelled with
her ten years ago, had made it up two weeks ago, and, obliged to be away
from Paris on that evening, had asked their son to stand in for them.
Now, a few days before, the Princesse’s doorman had met a young man in
the Champs-Elysées whom he had thought charming but whose identity he
had been unable to establish. Not that the young man had not proved as
amiable as he was generous. All the favours that the doorman had
imagined having to grant so young a gentleman, he had, on the contrary,
received. But M. de Châtellerault was as cowardly as he was imprudent;
he was the more determined not to discover his incognito inasmuch as he
did not know whom he had to deal with; he would have felt an even
greater fear – though ill-founded – had he known. He had merely passed
himself off as an Englishman, and to all the doorman’s impassioned
questions, who was eager to see someone to whom he was indebted for so
much pleasure and largesse again, the Duc had merely answered in
English, all the way along the Avenue Gabriel, ‘_I do not speak
French_.’

Although in spite of everything – because of his cousin’s maternal
origins – the Duc de Guermantes affected to find something a trifle
Courvoisier-like¹ about the Princesse de Guermantes-Bavière’s salon, the
general verdict on that lady’s spirit of initiative and intellectual
superiority was based on an innovation not to be met with anywhere else
in those circles. After dinner, and whatever the importance of the rout
that was to follow, the seats, at the Princesse de Guermantes’s, were
arranged in such a manner that you formed small groups, which, if need
be, had their backs to one another. The Princesse would then mark her
social sense by going and sitting in one of these, as if from
preference. She was not afraid, however, of selecting and calling on a
member of another group. If, for example, she had remarked to M.
Detaille,² who had naturally agreed, what a pretty neck Mme de Villemur
had, whose position in another group showed her from behind, the
Princesse did not hesitate to raise her voice: ‘Madame de Villemur, M.
Detaille, great painter that he is, is busy admiring your neck.’ Mme de
Villemur understood this as a direct invitation to join in the
conversation; with an agility born of her hours in the saddle, she
caused her chair slowly to pivot through an arc of three-quarters of a
circle and, without the least disturbance to her neighbours, sit almost
facing the Princesse. ‘You don’t know M. Detaille?’ asked her hostess,
for whom her guest’s skilful but modest about-face was not enough. ‘I
don’t know him, but I know his work,’ replied Mme de Villemur, with a
winning and respectful expression, and an aptness that many envied, even
as she was directing an imperceptible nod at the celebrated painter, her
being summoned not having amounted to a formal introduction to him.
‘Come, Monsieur Detaille,’ said the Princesse, ‘I’m going to introduce
you to Mme de Villemur.’ The latter then showed as much ingenuity in
making room for the author of _The Dream_³ as a little earlier in
turning towards him. And the Princesse brought a chair forward for
herself; indeed, she had summoned Mme de Villemur only so as to have a
pretext for leaving the first group, where she had spent the regulation
ten minutes, and granting an equal duration of her presence to a second.
Within three-quarters of an hour, all of the groups had received her
visit, which seemed every time to result from a sudden inspiration or a
predilection, but which had the object above all of throwing into relief
how naturally ‘a great lady knows how to entertain’. But now the guests
at the soirée were starting to arrive and the hostess had taken her seat
not far from the entrance – erect and haughty, in her quasi-royal
majesty, her eyes ablaze with their own incandescence – between two
plain-looking Highnesses and the Spanish Ambassadress.

I lined up behind several guests who had arrived ahead of me. Facing me
I had the Princesse, whose beauty, among so many others, is no doubt not
the only one to remind me of that particular party. But our hostess’s
face was so perfect, had been struck like some beautiful medal, that for
me it has preserved a commemorative value. The Princesse was in the
habit of saying to her guests, when she met them a few days before one
of her soirées: ‘You will come, won’t you?’, as if she felt a strong
desire to talk with them. But since, on the contrary, she had nothing to
say to them, the moment they arrived in front of her, she contented
herself, without getting up, with breaking off for a moment from her
vacuous conversation with the two Highnesses and the Ambassadress to
thank them, by saying, ‘It’s kind of you to come,’ not because she
thought that the guest had given proof of kindness by coming, but in
order to enhance even further her own; then at once throwing him back
into the river, she would add: ‘You’ll find M. de Guermantes at the door
into the gardens,’ so that you went off visiting and left her in peace.
To some even she said nothing, contenting herself with displaying her
admirable onyx eyes, as if you had come merely to an exhibition of
precious stones.

The first person to go in ahead of me was the Duc de Châtellerault.

Needing to respond to all the smiles, all the waved greetings that came
to him from the drawing-room, he had not noticed the doorman. But the
doorman had recognized him from the very first moment. In a moment, he
was going to know the identity he had so longed to learn. As he asked
his ‘Englishman’ of two days before what name he should announce, the
doorman was not merely moved, he judged himself to be indiscreet,
tactless. He seemed to be about to reveal to all the world (who would
suspect nothing, however) a secret that he was guilty of having
uncovered in this way and of broadcasting publicly. On hearing the
guest’s reply, ‘the Duc de Châtellerault’, he felt so overcome by pride
that he remained speechless for a moment. The Duc looked at him,
recognized him, saw himself ruined, as the manservant meanwhile, who had
regained control of himself and knew his armorial well enough to
complete for himself an over-modest designation, shouted out with a
professional vigour, mellowed by an intimate tenderness: ‘His Highness
Monseigneur the Duc de Châtellerault – But now it was my turn to be
announced. Absorbed in contemplation of our hostess, who had not yet
seen me, I had not reflected on the functions, terrible for me – though
in another way than for M. de Châtellerault – of this doorman, clad in
black like an executioner and surrounded by a troop of footmen in the
most cheerful liveries, lusty fellows ready to lay hands on an intruder
and show him the door. The doorman asked my name, and I gave it to him
as mechanically as a condemned man allowing himself to be attached to
the block. He at once raised his head majestically and, before I had
been able to beg him to keep his voice down when announcing me so as to
spare my _amour propre_ if I had not been invited, and that of the
Princesse de Guermantes if I had been, he shouted out the disquieting
syllables with a force capable of causing the roof of the house to
vibrate.

The illustrious Huxley (he whose nephew currently occupies a
preponderant place in the English literary world) ⁴ recounts how one of
his patients no longer dared go into society because often, in the very
chair that was being politely indicated to her, she could see an elderly
gentleman sitting. She was quite sure that either the gesture of
invitation, or the presence of the elderly gentleman, was a
hallucination, for they would not have been showing her to a chair that
was already occupied. When Huxley, in order to cure her, forced her to
return to a reception, she experienced a moment of painful hesitation
wondering whether the hospitable sign they made to her was the real
thing, or whether, in order to obey a non-existent vision, she was about
to sit down in public on the knees of a flesh-and-blood gentleman. Her
brief uncertainty was cruel. Less so perhaps than my own. From the
moment I heard my own name being roared out, like the sound preceding a
possible cataclysm, I had, so as at all events to plead my good faith
and as if I were not tormented by any doubts, to advance towards the
Princesse with a resolute air.

She caught sight of me when I was a few feet away and, what left me no
longer in any doubt that I had been the victim of a conspiracy, instead
of remaining seated as for the other guests, she got up and came towards
me. A second later, I was able to heave the sigh of relief of Huxley’s
patient when, having made up her mind to sit down on the chair, she
found it was unoccupied and realized that it was the elderly gentleman
who was a hallucination. The Princesse had just held out her hand to me
with a smile. She stayed standing for a few moments, with the kind of
graciousness peculiar to the stanza in Malherbe which ends: ‘_Et pour
leur faire honneur les Anges se lever_.’⁵

She apologized for the fact that the Duchesse had not yet arrived, as
though without her I must be bored. In order to thus bid me welcome, she
performed about me, holding me by the hand, a very graceful pirouette,
in whose vortex I felt swept away. I was almost expecting her then to
hand me, like the leader of a cotillion, an ivory-knobbed cane or a
wristwatch. Truth to tell, she gave me nothing like that but as if,
rather than dancing the Boston, she had been listening to a sacrosanct
Beethoven quartet, the sublime strains of which she was afraid of
disturbing, she halted the conversation there, or rather did not begin
it, and, still radiant from having seen me enter, merely informed me of
where the Prince was to be found.

I moved away and did not dare approach her again, sensing that she had
absolutely nothing to say to me and that in her immense good-will, this
marvellously tall and beautiful woman, noble as so many great ladies
were who mounted the scaffold with such pride, could only, not daring to
offer me some melissa cordial, have repeated what she had already twice
told me: ‘You’ll find the Prince in the garden.’ But to go up to the
Prince was to feel my doubts revive in a different form.

At all events, someone had to be found to present me. Dominating every
conversation could be heard the inexhaustible prattle of M. de Charlus,
who was talking with His Excellency the Duc de Sidonia, whose
acquaintance he had just made. As profession recognizes profession, so,
too, does vice. M. de Charlus and M. de Sidonia had each immediately
nosed out that of the other, which was, for both, to be, when in
company, monologuists, to the extent of being unable to bear any
interruption. Having at once adjudged that the malady was without
remedy, as a famous sonnet has it,⁶ they had made a resolve, not to stay
silent, but each to speak without concerning himself with what the other
would say. This had created that jumble of sound which, in Molière’s
comedies, is produced by several people saying different things at one
and the same time. The Baron, with his resonant voice, was certain in
any case of having the better of it, of drowning out the feeble voice of
M. de Sidonia, without discouraging the latter, however, for, whenever
M. de Charlus drew breath for a moment, the interval was filled by the
susurration of the Spanish grandee, who had imperturbably continued
discoursing. I might well have asked M. de Charlus to present me to the
Prince de Guermantes, but I was afraid (with only too good reason) that
he might be angry with me. I had behaved towards him in the most
ungrateful fashion in not taking him up on his offer for a second time
and in not showing him any sign of life since the evening when he had
seen me home so affectionately. Yet I had certainly not had as an
anticipated excuse the scene that I had just witnessed, that very
afternoon, taking place between Jupien and him. I had suspected nothing
of the sort. It is true that a little time before, when my parents were
reproaching me for my laziness and for not having yet taken the trouble
of dropping M. de Charlus a line, I had reproached them furiously for
wanting to make me accept dishonourable propositions. But anger alone,
and the desire to find the words that would be most disagreeable to
them, had dictated this untruthful reply. In actual fact, I had not
imagined there to have been anything sensual, or even sentimental, in
the Baron’s offers. I had said that to my parents out of sheer
foolishness. But the future sometimes dwells in us without our knowing
it, and the words thought to be untruthful describe an imminent reality.

M. de Charlus would no doubt have forgiven me my lack of gratitude. But
what made him furious was that my presence that evening at the Princesse
de Guermantes’, as for some little time past at her cousin’s, seemed to
make a mockery of his solemn declaration: ‘The only entrée to those
salons is through me.’ A grave fault, an inexpiable crime perhaps: I had
not followed the hierarchical path. M. de Charlus well knew that the
thunderbolts that he brandished at those who did not submit to his
commands, or to whom he had taken a strong dislike, were beginning to
pass, in the eyes of many, and however much fury he put into them, for
thunderbolts of cardboard, and no longer had the strength to expel
anyone from anywhere. But perhaps he thought that his power, although
diminished, was still great and remained intact in the eyes of a novice
such as myself. So I did not consider it the wisest course to ask a
service of him at a party where my mere presence seemed like an ironic
challenge to his pretensions.

At which moment I was stopped by a somewhat vulgar man, Professor E. He
had been surprised to see me at the Guermantes’. I was no less so to
find him there, for never before, and never again subsequently, had a
person of his sort been seen at the Princesse’s. He had just cured the
Prince, who had already received the last rites, of an infectious
pneumonia, and the very particular gratitude that Mme de Guermantes felt
towards him for this was the reason why they had broken with custom and
invited him. Since he knew absolutely no one in these drawing-rooms and
could not prowl about there indefinitely on his own like a minister of
death, having recognized me, he had felt that, for the first time in his
life, he had infinitely many things to say to me, which enabled him to
keep in countenance and was one of the reasons why he had come towards
me. There was a second reason. He attached great importance to never
being mistaken in a diagnosis. Now so many letters did he receive that
he could not always remember clearly, when he had only seen a patient
once, whether the illness had indeed followed the course he had assigned
to it. It has not been forgotten perhaps that at the time of my
grandmother’s stroke, I had taken her round to him on the evening when
he was having all those decorations sewn on. Some time having elapsed,
he no longer remembered the announcement he had been sent at the time.
‘Madame your grandmother is indeed dead, is she not?’ he said to me, in
a voice in which near-certainty had stilled a slight apprehensiveness.
‘Ah, indeed! Anyway, from the very first moment I saw her, my prognosis
was altogether gloomy, I remember very well.’

Thus it was that Professor E. learned or relearned of my grandmother’s
death, and I have to say to his credit, which is that of the medical
body as a whole, without manifesting, or perhaps feeling, any
satisfaction. The mistakes of doctors are innumerable. They err as a
rule out of optimism as to the treatment, and pessimism as to the
outcome. ‘Wine? In moderation it can’t do you any harm, it’s a tonic
when all’s said and done… Physical pleasure? It’s a function after all.
I permit it but not to be overdone, you understand. Excess of any kind
is a mistake.’ What a temptation all of a sudden for the patient to give
up those two resuscitators, water and chastity! If, on the other hand,
you have a heart or an albumen problem, or something of the kind, then
there is not long to go. Grave, but functional, troubles are readily
ascribed to an imaginary cancer. There is no point in keeping on with
visits that could never stay an ineluctable disease. Should the patient,
left to his own devices, now impose an implacable regimen on himself,
and then be cured or at the very least survive, the doctor, greeted by
him in the avenue de l’ Opéra when he thought him long since in the
Père-Lachaise, will see in this tipping of the hat a gesture of
sarcastic insolence. An innocent walk taken under his very nose would
arouse no greater fury in the Assize Court judge who, two years before,
had pronounced sentence of death on the seemingly fearless stroller.
Doctors (this does not apply to all of them, naturally, and I do not
omit, mentally, some admirable exceptions) are in general more
disgruntled, more irritated by the quashing of their verdict than joyful
at its execution. Which explains why Professor E., whatever intellectual
satisfaction he will have felt no doubt at finding he had not been
mistaken, was able to to speak only with sadness of the misfortune that
had struck us. He was not keen to cut short the conversation, which was
keeping him in countenance and was a reason for staying. He spoke to me
of the heat-wave we had been having in recent days but, although he was
literate and could have expressed himself in good French, he said: ‘This
hyperthermia doesn’t upset you?’ The fact is that medicine has made some
small progress in knowledge since Molière, but none in its vocabulary.
My interlocutor added: ‘What you need to do is to avoid the sudations
weather like this causes, especially in overheated drawing-rooms. You
can remedy them, when you return home and want something to drink, by
heat’ (which means, obviously, hot drinks).

Because of the manner of my grandmother’s death, the subject interested
me and I had recently read in a book by a great scientist that
perspiration harmed the kidneys by causing what should issue elsewhere
to pass through the skin. I had deplored the canicular weather during
which my grandmother died and had come close to holding it responsible.
I made no mention of this to Doctor E. but he said without being
prompted: ‘The advantage of this very hot weather, when perspiration is
very abundant, is that the kidney is correspondingly relieved.’ Medicine
is not an exact science.

Now that he had hold of me, Professor E. asked only not to leave me. But
I had just caught sight, making deep bows to the Princesse de Guermantes
to left and to right, having taken a step backwards, of the Marquis de
Vaugoubert. M. de Norpois had recently introduced me to him and I hoped
that in him I would find someone capable of presenting me to our host.
The proportions of the present work do not allow me to explain here the
incidents during his youth in consequence of which M. de Vaugoubert was
one of the few men (perhaps the only man) in society who found himself
in what is known in Sodom as ‘confidence’ with M. de Charlus.⁷ But if
our minister to King Theodosius had some of the same faults as the
Baron, they ranked as no more than the palest reflections of them. It
was only in an infinitely milder, sentimental and simple-minded form
that he displayed those alternations between sympathy and loathing
through which the desire to charm and then the fear – equally imaginary
– of being, if not despised then at least discovered, caused the Baron
to pass. M. de Vaugoubert nonetheless displayed these alternations, but
rendered absurd by a chastity, a ‘platonism’ (to which, highly ambitious
as he was, he had, ever since the days of the Foreign Office
examination, sacrificed all pleasure), above all by his intellectual
nullity. But whereas, in M. de Charlus’s case, immoderate praises were
trumpeted in a veritable sunburst of eloquence, and salted with the
subtlest, most mordant raillery, which marked a man for ever, with M. de
Vaugoubert, on the contrary, sympathy was expressed with the banality of
an utter mediocrity, a man of the fashionable world and a functionary,
and his grievances (generally a complete invention, as with the Baron)
by a malevolence that was untiring but mindless and all the more
shocking in that it was usually in contradiction of remarks the minister
had been making six months earlier and would perhaps be making again
before very long: a regularity of change that lent an almost
astronomical poetry to the various phases of M. de Vaugoubert’s life,
even though, this aside, no one could have put one less in mind of a
heavenly body.

The ‘good evening’ that he returned had nothing of that which M. de
Charlus would have wished me. To this ‘good evening’, M. de Vaugoubert
lent, apart from the high ceremoniousness he thought to be that of
society and of diplomacy, a jaunty, brisk, smiling tone, so as to seem,
on the one hand, overjoyed by life – whereas inwardly he was brooding
over the setbacks to a career lacking in promotion and in danger of
ending in a forced retirement – and on the other hand, young, virile and
charming, though he could see, and no longer dared even to go and
inspect in his mirror, the wrinkles forming on the outlying parts of a
face all of whose seductiveness he would have liked to have preserved.
It was not that he would have wished for actual conquests, the mere
thought of which frightened him on account of hearsay, of scandal and of
blackmail. Having gone from an almost infantile debauchery to absolute
continence on the day his thoughts turned to the Quai d’Orsay⁸ and the
desire to make a great career, he wore the look of a caged beast,
casting glances in all directions expressive of fear, craving and
stupidity. His own was such that he did not pause to consider that the
street boys of his adolescence were no longer children and that, when a
newspaper seller yelled ‘_La Presse_!’⁹ into his face, he shuddered in
terror more even than in desire, believing he had been recognized and
tracked down.

But, failing the pleasures sacrificed to an ungrateful Quai d’Orsay, M.
de Vaugoubert – and it was on this account that he would have liked
still to be found attractive – had sudden impulses of the heart. God
knows with how many letters he had pestered the Ministry, what personal
stratagems he had deployed, and how many times he had drawn on the
credit of Mme de Vaugoubert (who, because of her corpulence, her high
birth, her masculine look and especially because of the mediocrity of
her husband, was thought to be endowed with superior qualities and
fulfilling the true functions of the minister) in order, for no valid
reason, to get a young man entirely devoid of merit taken on to the
staff of the legation. It is true that, a few months or a few years
later, should this insignificant attaché have appeared to show, without
the least hint of any evil intent, signs of coldness towards his chief,
the latter, believing himself despised or betrayed, devoted the same
hysterical ardour to punishing him as once to gratifying him. He moved
heaven and earth to get him recalled, and the Director of Political
Affairs would receive a letter daily: ‘What is keeping you from getting
rid of this fellow for me? Give him a bit of a talking-to, for his own
good. What he needs is to be given a really hard time of it.’ For which
reason the post of attaché to the court of King Theodosius was far from
pleasant. But in every other respect, thanks to his perfect good sense
as a man of the world, M. de Vaugoubert was one of the French
government’s best representatives abroad. When, later on, a supposedly
superior man, a Jacobin,¹⁰ well-informed in every sphere, replaced him,
war was not long in breaking out between France and the country ruled
over by the King.

Like M. de Charlus, M. de Vaugoubert did not like to be the first to
greet one. Both preferred to ‘respond’, forever fearful of the rumours
that the person to whom they would otherwise have held out their hand
might have heard on their account since they last saw him. In my own
case, M. de Vaugoubert did not have to ask himself the question, for in
fact I had gone to greet him first, if only because of the difference in
age. He answered me with a wondering and delighted look, his two eyes
continuing to jump about as if there were forbidden clover to be grazed
on either side. I thought it proper to solicit from him my introduction
to Mme de Vaugoubert before that to the Prince, about which I was
counting on speaking to him only afterwards. The idea of bringing me
into contact with his wife appeared to fill him with joy for himself, as
for her, and he led me with resolute steps towards the Marquise.
Arriving in front of her, and indicating me with both his hand and his
eyes, with every possible mark of consideration, he remained nonetheless
without speaking and after a few seconds withdrew, with a fidgety look,
so as to leave me alone with his wife. The latter had at once held out
her hand to me, but without knowing to whom this mark of affability was
being addressed, for I realized that M. de Vaugoubert had forgotten what
my name was, had perhaps not recognized me even, and not wanting, out of
politeness, to admit it, had made the introduction consist of pure
pantomime. So I was no further advanced; how to get myself presented to
our host by a woman who did not know my name? Moreover, I found myself
forced to talk for a few moments with Mme de Vaugoubert. This annoyed me
from two points of view. I had no wish to remain for ever at this party,
for I had arranged with Albertine (I had given her a box for _Phèdre_)
¹¹ that she would come and see me a little before midnight. It is true
that I was not in love with her; by getting her to come that evening I
was obeying a wholly sensual desire, even though we were in that torrid
season of the year when a liberated sensuality is more ready to visit
the organs of taste and seeks coolness above all. More than for the kiss
of a girl, it thirsts for an orangeade or for a bath, or to gaze indeed
on that peeled and juicy moon that was quenching the thirst of the sky.
But I was counting on ridding myself at Albertine’s side – who brought
back for me, moreover, the coolness of the waves – of the regrets I
could not fail to be left with by so many charming faces (for the soirée
the Princesse was giving was for girls as well as ladies). There was
nothing attractive, on the other hand, about the morose Bourbon face of
the imposing Mme de Vaugoubert.

It was said at the Ministry, without the least hint of malice, that, in
this ménage, it was the husband who wore the skirts and the wife the
breeches. Now there was more truth in this than they thought. Mme de
Vaugoubert was a man. Whether she had always been one, or had become
what I now saw her to be, hardly matters, for in either case we are
dealing with one of nature’s most touching miracles, whereby, in the
second case especially, the human kingdom is made to resemble the
kingdom of flowers. On the first hypothesis – whether the future Mme de
Vaugoubert had always been so heavily mannish – nature, by a stratagem
both diabolical and beneficent, gives to the young girl the deceptive
aspect of a man. And the adolescent male who does not like women and
wishes to be cured lights with joy on this subterfuge, of discovering a
fiancée who for him is the embodiment of a market porter. In the
contrary case, if the woman does not to start with have masculine
characteristics, she gradually acquires them in order to please her
husband, unconsciously even, by that sort of mimeticism whereby certain
flowers give themselves the appearance of the insects they seek to
attract. The regret she feels at not being loved, at not being a man,
virilizes her. Even aside from the case that concerns us, who has not
observed how many of the most normal couples end up resembling one
another, sometimes even by exchanging their good qualities? A former
German Chancellor, the Prince von Bülow, had married an Italian woman.¹²
In due course, on the Pincio, it was remarked how much Italian delicacy
the German husband had acquired, and how much German coarseness the
Italian princess. To move out to a point eccentric to the laws we are
tracing, everyone knows of an eminent French diplomat whose origin was
recalled only by his name, one of the most illustrious in the East.¹³ As
he matured, as he aged, the Oriental whom no one had ever suspected was
revealed, and on seeing him you regretted the absence of the fez that
would have been the crowning touch.

To come back to habits wholly unknown to the ambassador whose
ancestrally padded silhouette we have just evoked, Mme de Vaugoubert
embodied the type, acquired or predestined, the immortal image of which
is the Princesse Palatine, forever in her riding habit and who, having
taken more from her husband than his virility, and espousing the defects
of the men who do not like women, denounces in her gossipy letters the
mutual dealings of all the great noblemen at the court of Louis XIV.¹⁴
One of the factors that further accentuate the masculine appearance of
women such as Mme de Vaugoubert is that the neglect they are left in by
their husbands, and the shame that they feel, casts a gradual blight on
everything womanly in them. In the end they acquire the virtues and
defects that the husband does not have. As he grows more frivolous, more
effeminate and more indiscreet, they become the charmless effigy as it
were of the virtues that the husband ought to be practising.

Traces of opprobrium, annoyance and indignation had clouded Mme de
Vaugoubert’s regular features. I felt, alas, that she looked on me with
interest and curiosity as one of the young men who appealed to M. de
Vaugoubert, and whom she would have so much liked to be now that her
ageing husband preferred youth. She looked at me with the attentiveness
of those provincial women who copy out of a fashion catalogue the
tailored dress that looks so well on the pretty young person in the
drawing (the same one on every page in point of fact, but illusorily
multiplied into different individuals thanks to the difference in the
poses and the variety of outfits). The vegetable attraction that drove
Mme de Vaugoubert towards me was so strong that she went so far as to
seize hold of my arm so that I might take her to drink a glass of
orangeade. But I freed myself on the pretext that, on the point of
leaving as I was, I had not yet had myself presented to our host.

The distance separating me from the entrance to the gardens where he
stood talking to one or two people was not very great. But it made me
more afraid than if, in order to cross it, I had had to expose myself to
a running fire.

Many women by whom I fancied I might be able to get myself presented
were in the garden, where, even as they feigned an impassioned
admiration, they hardly knew what to do with themselves. Parties of this
kind are generally anticipated. They scarcely become real until the next
day, when they occupy the attention of the people who were not invited.
If, on reading the article of a critic who has always evinced the
greatest admiration for him, a true writer, devoid of the foolish _amour
propre_ of so many literary people, finds the name of second-rate
authors listed but not his own, he does not have time to dwell on what
might for him be cause for astonishment: his books reclaim him. But a
society woman has nothing to do and, on discovering in the _Figaro_:
‘Yesterday the Prince and Princesse de Guermantes gave a grand soirée,
etc.,’ she exclaims: ‘What! I talked, three days ago, for an hour with
Marie-Gilbert, without her so much as mentioning it!’ and she racks her
brains wondering what she might have done to the Guermantes. It has to
be said that where the Princesse’s parties were concerned, the surprise
was sometimes as great among those who were invited as those who were
not. For they exploded at the very moment when they were least expected,
and sent a summons to people whom Mme de Guermantes had been neglecting
for years. And almost all society people are so insignificant that each
of their peers judges them only according to their degree of
friendliness, cherishes them if invited, detests them if excluded. In
the case of these last, if, indeed, the Princesse, even though they were
among her friends, did not invite them, this often arose from her fear
of displeasing ‘Palamède’, who had excommunicated them. So I could be
certain that she had not spoken about me to M. de Charlus, otherwise I
would not have found myself there. He was now leaning, facing the
garden, next to the Ggerman Ambassador, on the balustrade of the great
staircase which led back into the house, so that, in spite of the three
or four female admirers who had congregated around the Baron and were
almost screening him, the guests were obliged to come and wish him good
evening. He answered by styling people by their names. You heard
successively: ‘Good evening, Monsieur du Hazay, good evening, Madame de
la Tour du Pin-Vercluse, good evening, Madame de la Tour du
Pin-Gouvernet, good evening, Philibert, good evening, my dear
Ambassadress, and so on.’ This made for a continuous yapping,
interspersed with well-meaning advice or questions (to the answers to
which he paid no heed), which M. de Charlus addressed in a tone at once
gentler, artificial, in order to attest to his indifference, and benign:
‘Mind the little one doesn’t catch cold, gardens are always a bit damp.
Good evening, Madame de Brantes. Good evening, Madame de Mecklembourg.
Is your young daughter here? Has she put on that ravishing pink dress?
Good evening, Saint-Géran.’ Certainly, there was arrogance in this
attitude. M. de Charlus knew he was a Guermantes occupying a
preponderant place at this entertainment. But there was not only
arrogance, and the very word entertainment evoked, for a man of
aesthetic gifts, the sense of luxury and of curiosity that it may have
if the entertainment in question is being given not by society people
but in a painting by Carpaccio or Veronese. It is even more likely that
the German prince that was M. de Charlus was picturing to himself rather
the entertainment that unfolds in _Tannhäuser_, with himself as the
Margrave, having a kindly, condescending word for each of the guests at
the entrance to the Warburg, as they disperse into the castle or the
park, saluted by the long phrase, a hundred times repeated, of the
famous March.¹⁵

I had to come to a decision, however. I was well able to recognize under
the trees women with whom I was more or less friendly, but they seemed
transformed because they were at the Princesse’s and not at her
cousin’s, and because I saw them sitting not in front of a Saxe plate
but beneath the branches of a chestnut tree. The elegance of the setting
played no part in it. Had it been infinitely less than at ‘Oriane’s’ the
same unease would still have existed inside me. Should the electricity
happen to go off in our drawing-room and have to be replaced by oil
lamps, everything seems altered. I was rescued from my uncertainty by
Mme de Souvré. ‘Good evening, she said as she came up to me. Is it long
since you saw the Duchesse de Guermantes?’ She excelled at lending words
of this kind an intonation which proved she was not uttering them out of
pure stupidity, like those people who, not knowing what to talk about,
are forever accosting you and naming some common acquaintance, often
very vague. She, on the contrary, had a fine conductor wire in her eyes,
which signified: ‘Don’t think I didn’t recognize you. You’re the young
man I’ve seen at the Duchesse de Guermantes’s. I remember very well.’
Unfortunately, the protection extended over me by these seemingly stupid
yet delicately intentioned words was extremely fragile and vanished the
moment I sought to make use of it. Mme de Souvré had the art, if it were
a matter of backing up a request to someone of influence, of appearing
both to be recommending it in the eyes of the petitioner, and not to be
recommending this petitioner in the eyes of the exalted personage, in
such a way that this double-edged gesture opened a credit balance of
gratitude from the former without incurring any debt vis-à-vis the
other. Encouraged by this lady’s good grace to ask her to present me to
M. de Guermantes, she seized on a moment when our host’s eyes were not
turned in our direction, took me maternally by the shoulders and,
smiling at the Prince’s face, which was turned away, so that he could
not see her, she thrust me towards him with a movement purportedly
protective yet deliberately ineffective, which left me stranded almost
at my point of departure. Such is the cowardliness of society people.

That of a lady who came up to greet me by calling me by my name was
greater still. I tried to recover her name even as I was speaking to
her; I remembered very well having dined with her, I remembered things
she had said to me. But my attention, straining towards that inner
region where these memories of her were, was unable to discover the
name. Yet it was there. My mind was engaged on a sort of game with it in
order to grasp its contours and the letter it began with, and finally to
illuminate it in its entirety. It was so much wasted effort, I could
more or less sense its mass, its weight, but as for its forms, comparing
these with the mysterious captive huddled in the darkness within, I said
to myself, ‘That’s not it.’ My mind might certainly have been able to
create the most difficult names. But alas, it had, not to create, but to
reproduce. Any action of the mind is easy when it is not subject to
reality. Here, I was forced to submit. At last, suddenly, the name came
in its entirety: ‘Madame d’Arpajon.’ I am wrong to say that it came, for
I do not believe it appeared to me under its own propulsion. Nor do I
think that my numerous faint memories relating to this lady, whose help
I did not cease to solicit (by exhortations such as: ‘Come on, this is
the woman who’s a friend of Mme de Souvré, who has so simple-minded an
admiration for Victor Hugo, along with so much terror and repugnance’),
I do not believe that all these memories, fluttering about between me
and her name, served in the very least to refloat it. In the great game
of ‘hide-and-seek’ played out in the memory when we are trying to
recover a name, there is not a series of graduated approximations. We
can see nothing, then all of a sudden the exact name appears and quite
different from what we thought we could divine. It is not it that has
come to us. No, I believe rather that, as we go on through life, we
spend our time distancing ourselves from the zone where a name is
distinct, and that it was by the exercise of my will and my attention,
which enhanced the acuity of my inward gaze, that I had suddenly
penetrated the semi-darkness and seen clearly. At all events, if there
are transitions between forgetfulness and memory, those transitions are
unconscious. For the intermediate names through which we pass, before
finding the right name, are themselves false, and bring us no closer to
it. They are not even names properly speaking, but often mere consonants
not to be found in the rediscovered name. The work of the mind as it
passes from nothingness to reality is so mysterious, on the other hand,
that it is possible after all that these false consonants are a pole
held clumsily out to us in advance, to help us grapple the right name.
‘All of which, the reader will say, teaches us nothing about this lady’s
disobligingness; but since you’ve been at a standstill for this long,
let me, _Monsieur l’auteur_, make you waste one minute more to tell you
how regrettable it is that, young as you were (or as your hero was if he
is not yourself), you should already have had so little memory as to be
unable to recall the name of a lady whom you knew very well.’ It is very
regrettable, you are right, _Monsieur le lecteur_. And sadder than you
think, once it is sensed as heralding the day when names and words will
vanish from the illuminated zone of the mind and we shall have to give
up for ever naming to ourselves those whom we have known best. It is
regrettable indeed that, from our youth on, it should require such
labour to recover names we know well. But were this infirmity to occur
only with names barely known and quite naturally forgotten, and which we
do not want to weary ourselves by recalling, then this infirmity would
not be without its advantages. ‘And what are they, pray?’ Well,
Monsieur, the fact is that this malady alone causes us to take notice of
and to learn, and enables us to analyse, the mechanisms of which we
would otherwise be ignorant. A man who drops into his bed each evening
like a dead weight and lives again only at the moment of coming awake
and getting up, will that man ever dream of making, if not great
discoveries, then at least some minor observations, concerning sleep? He
hardly knows whether he sleeps. A spot of insomnia is not without its
uses for appreciating sleep, for projecting a certain light into that
darkness. An unfailing memory is no very powerful stimulus for studying
the phenomena of memory. ‘So Mme d’Arpajon finally introduced you to the
Prince?’ No, but be quiet and let me take up my story again.

Mme d’Arpajon was even more cowardly than Mme de Souvré, but her
cowardice had greater excuse. She knew she had always had little
influence in society. This influence had been further weakened by the
liaison she had had with the Duc de Guermantes; the latter’s rejection
of her was the final straw. The ill-humour produced in her by my request
to be introduced to the Prince resulted in a silence, which she was
naïve enough to think was an appearance of not having heard what I said.
She did not even realize that anger had caused her to frown. Or perhaps
she did realize but was not troubled by the contradiction, using it for
the lesson in tact she could give me without being too impolite, I mean
a lesson which was wordless but no less eloquent on that account.

Mme d’Arpajon was in any case much put out, the gaze of many having been
raised towards a Renaissance balcony at the corner of which, in place of
the monumental statues that were so often placed there in those days,
there leaned, no less sculptural than they, the magnificent Duchesse de
Surgis-le-Duc, she who had just succeeded Mme d’Arpajon in the
affections of Basin de Guermantes. Beneath the flimsy white tulle that
protected her against the cool night air could be seen the supple body
of a winged Victory. My one remaining recourse was to M. de Charlus, who
had gone back into a room below, which gave access to the garden. I had
ample leisure (since he was pretending to be absorbed in a simulated
game of whist, which enabled him not to appear to see people) in which
to admire the wilful and artistic simplicity of his dress coat which,
thanks to tiny details that a couturier alone might have discerned,
looked like a ‘Harmony’ in black and white by Whistler;¹⁶ or rather
black, white and red for M. de Charlus wore, suspended by a broad ribbon
against the jabot of his evening-dress, the white, black and red enamel
cross of a Knight of the religious Order of Malta. At that moment, the
Baron’s game was interrupted by Mme de Gallardon, who had her nephew in
tow, the Vicomte de Courvoisier, a young man with a pretty face and an
impertinent air: ‘Cousin, said Mme de Gallardon, allow me to introduce
to you my nephew Adalbert. Adalbert, you know, the famous Uncle Palamède
you’re always hearing about. – Good evening, Mme de Gallardon,’ replied
M. de Charlus. And he added, without even looking at the young man:
‘Good evening, Monsieur’, with a surly look and in so violently
discourteous a tone that everyone was astounded. Perhaps, knowing that
Mme de Gallardon had her suspicions as to his habits and had been unable
to resist for once the pleasure of alluding to them, M. de Charlus was
anxious to forestall whatever embroidery she might add to a friendly
reception of her nephew, at the same time making a resounding profession
of his indifference with respect to young men; or perhaps he considered
that the aforesaid Adalbert had not replied to his aunt’s words with a
sufficiently respectful air; or perhaps, eager to press home his attack
later on so attractive a cousin, he wanted to give himself the
advantages of a previous act of aggression, like those sovereigns who,
before engaging in a diplomatic démarche, support it with a military
action.

It was not as difficult as I had thought for M. de Charlus to accede to
my request for an introduction. For one thing, in the course of the last
twenty years, this Don Quixote had tilted against so many windmills
(frequently relatives who he claimed had behaved badly towards him), and
had forbidden people to be invited with such regularity, ‘as someone
unfit to be received’, by either male or female Guermantes, that the
latter were beginning to be afraid of quarrelling with all the people
whom they liked, and of being deprived until the day they died of the
company of certain newcomers about whom they were curious, in order to
espouse the thunderous yet unexplained grudges of a brother-in-law or
cousin who would have wanted them to abandon wife, brother and children
for his sake. Being more intelligent than the other Guermantes, M. de
Charlus had noticed that only one in two of his vetoes was effective
and, looking ahead to the future and fearing that one day it might be
him of whom they would deprive themselves, he had begun to cut his
losses, to lower, as they say, his prices. Moreover, if he was capable
of giving an identical life to some hated individual for months, or for
years, on end – to whom he would not have tolerated an invitation being
extended, but would rather have fought, like a street porter, with a
queen, the rank of whatever stood in his way no longer counting for him
– his explosions of anger on the other hand were too frequent for them
not to be somewhat fragmentary. ‘The imbecile, the miserable devil!
We’re going to return him to where he belongs, sweep him into the gutter
where, alas, he won’t do much for the salubriousness of the town,’ he
would shout, even when alone at home, on reading a letter he considered
irreverent, or on recalling a remark that had been repeated to him. But
a fresh outburst against a second imbecile would dispel the earlier one,
and, provided the first imbecile proved deferential, the attack he had
occasioned was forgotten, not having lasted long enough to create a
foundation of hatred on which to build. So perhaps – in spite of his
ill-humour against me – I would have succeeded with him when I asked him
to introduce me to the Prince, had I not had the unhappy idea of adding,
out of scrupulousness, and so that he should not suppose me tactless
enough to have entered on the off chance, relying on him to enable me to
stay: ‘You know that I know them very well, the Princesse has been very
kind to me. – Well, if you know them, what need have you of me to
introduce you?’ he snapped at me and, turning his back, resumed his
make-believe game of cards with the Nuncio, the German Ambassador and a
personage whom I did not know.

Then, from the depths of those gardens where once the Duc d’Aiguillon
had bred rare animals, there reached me, through the wide-open doors, a
sniffing sound, of someone breathing in all this elegance and wanting
none of it to go to waste. The sound drew closer, I made in its
direction on the off chance, with the result that the words ‘good
evening’ were murmured into my ear by M. de Bréauté, not like the
jagged, metallic sound of a knife being ground on the wheel, let alone
the cry of the young wild boar that lays waste the crops, but like the
voice of a potential saviour. Less influential than Mme de Souvré, but
less fundamentally afflicted than her by disobligingness, far more at
ease with the Prince than was Mme d’Arpajon, under an illusion perhaps
concerning my own place in the Guermantes circle, or perhaps knowing it
better than I did, I yet had, in those first seconds, some difficulty in
securing his attention for, with nostrils dilated and the papillae of
his nose quivering, he was facing in all directions, his monocle-eye
wide with curiosity as though he had found himself faced by five hundred
masterpieces. But having heard my request, he welcomed it with
satisfaction, led me towards the Prince and presented me to him wearing
a hungry, ceremonious and vulgar expression as though he were passing
him, along with a recommendation, a plate of petits fours. Just as the
Duc de Guermantes’s greeting was, when he wanted, friendly, imbued with
camaraderie, cordial and familiar, so I found that of the Prince stiff,
solemn and haughty. He barely smiled at me, and addressed me gravely as
‘Monsieur’. I had often heard the Duc make fun of his cousin’s
aloofness. But from the first words he spoke to me, which, in their
coldness and seriousness, formed the most complete contrast with Basin’s
way of speaking, I realized at once that the fundamentally disdainful
man was the Duc, who spoke to you from your first visit ‘as an equal’,
and that, of the two cousins, the truly simple one was the Prince. In
his reserve I found a greater sense, I will not say of equality, for
that would have been inconceivable for him, then at least of the
consideration one may accord an inferior, as occurs in any strongly
hierarchical setting, at the Palais de Justice for example, or in a
university faculty, where a public prosecutor or a ‘dean’, conscious of
his high office, perhaps hides more actual simplicity and, once you get
to know him better, more kindness, true simplicity and cordiality,
beneath a traditional hauteur than someone more up to date in his
affectation of a bantering camaraderie. ‘Are you expecting to follow
Monsieur your father’s career?’ he said to me with a distant yet
interested expression. I replied summarily to his question, realizing he
had only asked it in order to be gracious, and moved away to let him
welcome the new arrivals.

I caught sight of Swann, and wanted to speak to him, but at that moment
I saw that the Prince de Guermantes, instead of receiving Odette’s
husband’s greeting there where he stood, had immediately, with the force
of a suction pump, dragged him off to the end of the garden, but, so
certain persons informed me, ‘so as to show him the door’.

So distracted in society that I learned only two days later, from the
newspapers, that a Czech orchestra had been playing throughout the
evening and that there had been, minute by minute, a constant succession
of Bengal fire, I recovered a certain capacity for attentiveness at the
thought of going to see Hubert Robert’s celebrated fountain.¹⁷

It could be seen from afar, set up to one side, in a clearing
sequestered by beautiful trees, several of which were as old as it was,
slender, immobile, solidified, allowing only the faintest spray falling
back from its pale and tremulous plume to be disturbed by the breeze.
The eighteenth century had purified the elegance of its lines, but, in
determining the jet’s style, seemed to have arrested its life; at this
distance, you had an impression of art rather than the sensation of the
water. The moist cloud that was perpetually gathering at its summit had
itself preserved the character of the age, like those which congregate
in the sky around the palaces of Versailles. But from close to, you
became aware that, even as they respected, like the stones of an ancient
palace, the design traced out for them beforehand, the waters were being
constantly renewed as they sprang upwards, seeking to obey the ancient
orders of the architect, and executing them accurately only by appearing
to violate them, their innumerable scattered surges able to give the
impression of a single impulse only from a distance. This last was in
actual fact as frequently interrupted as the scattering of its fall,
whereas, from a distance, it had seemed to me dense, inflexible, of an
unbroken continuity. From quite close to, you could see that this
continuity, altogether linear in appearance, was ensured at every point
in the jet’s ascent, wherever it ought to have been broken, by the
coming into play, the lateral reprise, of a parallel jet that rose
higher than the first and was itself, at a greater, and by now
exhausting, height, relieved by a third. From close to, spent drops were
falling back from the column of water and meeting their ascending
sisters along the way, and now and again, torn and seized by an eddy of
the air disturbed by this tireless upsurge, they drifted before
capsizing into the basin. By their vacillations, and by travelling in
the contrary direction, they frustrated, and with their soft vapour they
blurred, the verticality and tension of this shaft, which bore above it
an oblong cloud formed of innumerable droplets, yet appearing to have
been painted an immutable golden brown, that rose, infrangible,
immobile, slender and rapid, to add itself to the clouds in the sky.
Unfortunately, a puff of wind was enough to send it obliquely across the
ground; at times even, a single disobedient jet would diverge and, had
it not remained at a respectful distance, would have soaked the
incautious crowd of onlookers to the skin.

One of these minor accidents, which hardly ever occurred except at
moments when the breeze got up, was somewhat disagreeable. Mme d’Arpajon
had been led to believe that the Duc de Guermantes – in actual fact not
yet arrived – was with Mme de Surgis in the galleries of pink marble
which were reached through the double colonnade, hollow inside, that
rose from the rim of the basin. Now, just as Mme d’Arpajon was about to
enter on one of these colonnades, a strong gust from the warm breeze
twisted the jet of water and inundated the good lady so thoroughly that,
with the water trickling down inside her dress from her décolletage, she
was as soaked as if she had been plunged into a bath. Then, not far
away, a rhythmical rumbling sounded, loud enough to be audible by an
entire army, yet prolonged in periods as if it were addressed not to the
whole assembly, but successively, to each section of the troops; it was
the Grand-Duke Vladimir¹⁸ laughing for all he was worth at the sight of
Mme d’Arpajon’s immersion, one of the jolliest things, he liked to say
afterwards, he had ever witnessed in all his life. A few charitable
souls pointing out to the Muscovite that a word of condolence from him
was perhaps in order and would give pleasure to the lady, who, although
she would never see forty again, and even as she was mopping herself
with her scarf, without asking for anyone’s help, had extricated herself
despite the water that had made the rim of the basin treacherously wet,
the Grand-Duke, a kindly man at heart, thought action was called for
and, the last drum-rolls of laughter having hardly been stilled, a fresh
rumbling could be heard, still more violent than the earlier one.
‘Bravo, old thing!’ he cried, clapping his hands as if at the theatre.
Mme d’Arpajon did not appreciate having her dexterity praised at the
expense of her youth. And when someone said to her, deafened by the
sound of the water, which was dominated even so by the thunder of
Monseigneur: ‘I believe His Imperial Highness said something to you. –
No, it was to Mme de Souvré,’ she replied.

I crossed the gardens and reascended the steps, where the absence of the
Prince, who had vanished off to one side with Swann, had swollen the
crowd of guests around M. de Charlus, just as, when Louis XIV was not at
Versailles, more people gathered at Monsieur, his brother’s. I was
stopped as I passed by the Baron, while behind me two ladies and a young
man were approaching to greet him.

‘It’s nice to see you here,’ he said, offering me his hand. ‘Good
evening, Madame de la Tremoïlle, good evening, my dear Herminie.’ But no
doubt the memory of what he had said to me concerning his role as head
of the Guermantes _hôtel_ had given him the desire to appear to be
feeling, with regard to what displeased him but which he had been unable
to prevent, a satisfaction to which his lordly impertinence and his
hysterical amusement at once lent a form of excessive irony: ‘It’s nice,
he repeated, but above all it’s very comic.’ And he began to let out
roars of laughter that seemed to testify both to his delight and to the
incapacity of human speech to give it expression, as certain people
meanwhile, knowing both how hard of access he was and how liable to
insolent ‘outbursts’, approached in curiosity and then, with an almost
indecent haste, took to their heels. ‘Come, don’t be angry, he said,
touching me gently on the shoulder, you know I’m very fond of you. Good
evening, Antioche, good evening, Louis-René. Have you been to see the
fountain?’ he asked me in a tone of voice more affirmative than
questioning. ‘It’s very pretty, is it not? It’s marvellous. It could be
even better, of course, by doing away with certain things, then there’d
be nothing to equal it in France. But even as it is, it’s among the best
things. Bréauté will tell you they were wrong to hang lanterns, to try
and make people forget it was he who had that absurd idea. But, when
all’s said and done, he succeeded in making it only a little bit uglier.
It’s much harder to disfigure a masterpiece than to create it. We
already had a vague suspicion anyway that Bréauté was no Hubert Robert.’

I rejoined the line of visitors who were entering the house. ‘Has it
been long since you saw my delightful cousin Oriane?’ the Princesse
asked me, who had shortly before deserted her armchair by the entrance,
and with whom I now returned to the drawing-rooms. ‘She’s due to be here
this evening, I saw her during the afternoon, added our hostess. She
promised me. I believe in any case that you are dining with the two of
us at the Queen of Italy’s,¹⁹ in the embassy, on Thursday. Every
possible Highness will be there, it’ll be most intimidating.’ They could
in no way have intimidated the Princesse de Guermantes, whose
drawing-rooms teemed with them and who used to say ‘My little Coburgs’,
as it might have been ‘My little dogs’. And so Mme de Guermantes said
‘It’ll be most intimidating’ out of sheer silliness, which, among
society people, even overcomes their vanity. With respect to her own
genealogy, she knew less than an _agrégé d’histoire_.²⁰ Where her
connections were concerned, she was keen to show that she knew the
nicknames they had been given. Having asked me whether I would be dining
the following week at the Marquise de la Pommelière’s, often known as
‘la Pomme’, the Princesse, having obtained a negative reply, was silent
for a few moments. Then, for no reason other than a deliberate display
of involuntary erudition, banality and conformity to the prevailing
spirit, she added: ‘She’s quite an agreeable woman, la Pomme!’

It was just as the Princesse was talking with me that the Duc and
Duchesse de Guermantes made their entry. But I was unable at first to go
forward to them, for I was snapped up in passing by the Turkish
Ambassadress, who, pointing to our hostess, whom I had just left,
exclaimed, seizing hold of me by the arm: ‘Oh, what a delightful woman
the Princesse is! A being so superior to all others! I fancy that were I
a man, she added, with a hint of Oriental obsequiousness and sensuality,
I would devote my life to that heavenly creature.’ I replied that I
indeed found her charming, but that I knew her cousin the Duchesse
better. ‘But there’s no comparison, the Ambassadress said to me, Oriane
is a charming woman of the world who gets her wit from Mémé and Babal,
whereas Marie-Gilbert is _somebody_.’

I never much like thus being told without possibility of reply what I am
to think about people whom I know. And there was no reason why the
Turkish Ambassadress’s judgment as to the merits of the Duchesse de
Guermantes should be any more sure than my own. On the other hand, which
also explained my irritation with the Ambassadress, the fact is that the
defects of a mere acquaintance, or even of a friend, are for us true
poisons, against which we are fortunately ‘mithridatized’. But, without
making the least show of scientific comparisons and talking of
anaphylaxy, let me say that at the heart of our friendly or merely
social dealings, there is a hostility, cured temporarily but recurring
in fits. Normally, we suffer little from these poisons so long as people
are ‘natural’. By saying ‘Babal’ and ‘Mémé’, to refer to people whom she
did not know, the Turkish Ambassadress had suspended the effects of the
‘mithridatism’ which normally made her bearable. She had irritated me,
which was the more unjust inasmuch as she had not spoken in this way in
order to make me think she was an intimate of ‘Mémé’s, but because an
over-rapid education had led her to name these noble lords according to
what she believed was the local custom. She had completed her schooling
in a few months without seeing it through to the end. But on reflection,
I discovered another reason for my displeasure at remaining with the
Ambassadress. It was not long since, at ‘Oriane’s’, this same diplomatic
personage had told me, wearing a serious, considered expression, that
the Princesse de Guermantes was frankly antipathetic to her. I saw fit
not to dwell on this about-turn: the invitation to this evening’s party
had brought it about. The Ambassadress was perfectly sincere in telling
me that the Princesse de Guermantes was a sublime creature. She had
always thought so. But never having up until now been invited to the
Princesse’s, she thought she must give to this kind of non-invitation
the form of a voluntary abstention founded on principle. Now that she
had been invited, and very likely would be from now on, her sympathy
could express itself freely. There is no need, in order to explain
three-quarters of the opinions held about people, to go so far as a love
that has been spurned or an exclusion from political power. Our judgment
remains unsure: an invitation refused or received determines it.
Moreover, the Turkish Ambassadress, in the words of the Duchesse de
Guermantes, who was carrying out an inspection of the drawing-rooms with
me, ‘did well’. She was above all very useful. The true stars of society
are weary of appearing there. Anyone who is curious to set eyes on them
has often to emigrate into another hemisphere, where they are more or
less alone. But women of the Ottoman Ambassadress’s kind, newly entered
into society, do not fail to shine there, everywhere at once, so to
speak. They are useful to performances of the kind known as a soirée or
a rout, to which they would have themselves dragged from their
death-beds rather than miss them. They are the extras on whom you can
always count, zealous in never missing a party. Thus foolish young men,
unaware that they are false stars, see them as the queens of fashion,
whereas instruction would be needed to explain to them the reasons in
virtue of which Mme Standish, not known to them and who paints cushions,
far away from society, is at least as great a lady as the Duchesse de
Doudeauville.²¹

In the ordinary course of things, the Duchesse de Guermantes’s eyes were
distracted and a little melancholy; she only made them shine with a
flame of wit each time she had to greet some friend, absolutely as if
the latter had been some witticism, some delightful shaft, some gourmet
delicacy, the sampling of which has brought an expression of joy and
refinement to the face of the connoisseur. But with these grand soirées,
since she had too many people to acknowledge, she had decided it would
be wearisome, after each one of them, to turn off the light each time. A
literary gourmet, going to the theatre to see a new play by one of the
masters of the stage, attests to his certainty that he will not be
spending a bad evening by having already, even as he hands his things to
the usherette, adjusted his lips for a judicious smile, and brought a
light of sly approval into his eyes; so it was that, from the moment she
arrived, the Duchesse would turn on the lights for the whole evening.
And as she was handing over her evening cloak, of a magnificent Tiepolo
red, to reveal a yoke of real rubies which encircled her neck, after
casting the couturière’s last rapid, meticulous and complete glance at
her dress, which is that of the society woman, Oriane checked on the
sparkle in her eyes no less than on her other jewels. In vain did a few
‘well-wishers’ like M. de Joinville dash up to the Duc to stop him from
entering: ‘Don’t you know then that poor Mama is at the point of death?
They’ve just given her the last rites. – I know, I know,’ replied M. de
Guermantes, pushing the intruder away in order to enter. The viaticum
has worked wonders,’ he added with a smile of pleasure at the thought of
the costume ball he was determined not to miss after the Prince’s
soirée. ‘We didn’t want it known that we had returned home,’ the
Duchesse said to me. She did not suspect that the Princesse had
invalidated these words for me in advance by recounting how she had seen
her cousin briefly, who had promised to come. The Duc, after a long
stare, with which he crushed his wife for five whole minutes: ‘I told
Oriane of the doubts you had.’ Now that she could see they were
unfounded and that she need take no steps to try to dispel them, she
declared them to be absurd, and teased me at length. ‘Fancy supposing
you weren’t invited! One is always invited! And then, there was me. Do
you think I wouldn’t have been able to get you invited to my cousin’s?’
I have to say that often, subsequently, she did far more difficult
things for me; nevertheless, I was careful not to take her words in the
sense of my having shown too great a reserve. I was beginning to know
the precise value of the spoken or silent language of aristocratic
amiability, an amiability happy to pour balm on the sense of inferiority
of those in respect of whom it is exercised, but not, however, to the
extent of dispelling it, in which event it would no longer have any
_raison d’être_. ‘But you are our equal, if not better,’ the Guermantes
seemed, by all their actions, to be saying; and they said it in the
nicest way imaginable, so as to be liked and admired, but not so as to
be believed; to tease out the fictitious nature of this amiability was
to have been what they called well brought up; to believe that
amiability to be real was to lack breeding. I received as it happens a
short time after this a lesson which finally taught me, with the most
perfect exactitude, the extent and limits of certain forms of
aristocratic amiability. It was at a matinée given by the Duchesse de
Montmorency²² for the Queen of England; a sort of small cortège had
formed to go to the buffet, at the head of which walked the sovereign
with, on her arm, the Duc de Guermantes. This was the moment of my own
arrival. With his free hand, the Duc made, from a good forty metres
away, innumerable gestures of summons and of friendship, which seemed to
be saying that I could approach without fear, that I would not be eaten
alive in place of the sandwiches. But, I, who was beginning to become
word perfect in the language of the courts, instead of moving even a
single step closer, gave a deep bow from my forty metres of distance,
but without smiling, as I would have done faced by someone I hardly
knew, then continued on my way in the opposite direction. I might have
written a masterpiece, and the Guermantes would have done me less honour
than for this bow. It did not go unobserved by the eyes either of the
Duc, even though he had to respond to more than five hundred people that
day, or of the Duchesse, who, having met my mother, recounted it to her,
and, while being careful not to say that I had been in the wrong, that I
should have gone up, told her that her husband had marvelled at my bow,
that it would have been impossible to make it any more expressive. They
did not cease to discover all the virtues in that bow, without however
mentioning that which had seemed the most precious, to wit that it had
been discreet, nor did they cease paying me compliments which I realized
were less a reward for the past than an indication for the future, on
the lines of that tactfully supplied to his pupils by the head of an
educational establishment: ‘Don’t forget, my dear children, that these
prizes are less for you than for your parents, so that they will send
you back next year.’ Thus it was that Mme de Marsantes, when someone
from a different world entered her circle, extolled before him those
discreet people ‘whom one finds when one goes in search of them and who
keep themselves to themselves the rest of the time’, just as, in a
roundabout way, you advise a servant who smells that bathing does
wonders for the health.

While, before even she had left the entrance hall, I was talking with
Mme de Guermantes, I heard a voice of a kind that, in the future, I was
to be able to distinguish beyond possibility of error. It was, in this
particular instance, that of M. Vaugoubert talking with M. de Charlus. A
clinician has no need even for the patient under observation to lift his
shirt nor to listen to his breathing, the voice is sufficient. How many
times later on was I not struck in a drawing-room by the intonation or
the laugh of some man who was imitating exactly the language of his
profession or the manners of his circle, and affecting a severe
refinement or a coarse familiarity, yet the falsity of whose voice acted
like a tuning-fork on my practised ear and was enough to tell me ‘he’s a
Charlus’! At that moment, the entire staff of an embassy went by, and
bowed to M. de Charlus. Although my discovery of the kind of sickness in
question dated only from that same day (when I had caught sight of M. de
Charlus and Jupien), I would not have needed, in order to make a
diagnosis, to ask any questions or listen to any chests. But M.
Vaugoubert, talking with M. de Charlus, seemed unsure. Yet he ought to
have known how things stood after the doubts of his adolescence. The
invert believes he is the only one of his kind in the entire universe;
only later does he imagine – another exaggeration – that the sole
exception is the normal man. But, ambitious yet timorous, M. de
Vaugoubert had not yielded for a long time past to what for him would
have been pleasure. The diplomatic career had had the same effect on his
life as if he had taken holy orders. Coupled with his assiduity at the
École des Sciences Politiques,²³ it had condemned him since his twenties
to the chastity of a Christian. Thus, just as each sense loses some of
its strength and acuity, and atrophies once it is no longer exercised,
M. de Vaugoubert, like the civilized man who would no longer be capable
of the feats of strength or the keenness of hearing of the cave-man, had
lost that special perspicacity which was rarely found wanting in M. de
Charlus; and at official dinner-tables, whether in Paris or abroad, the
Minister Plenipotentiary no longer managed even to recognize those who,
under the disguise of their uniforms, were in fact of his own kind. A
few names uttered by M. de Charlus, indignant should his own tastes be
mentioned but always amused to let those of others be known, came as a
delightful surprise to M. de Vaugoubert. Not that, after all these
years, he dreamed of taking advantage of any such windfall. But these
rapid revelations, similar to those which, in Racine’s tragedies, inform
Athalie and Abner that Joas is of the race of David, or that Esther,
seated in the purple, has kinsfolk who are ‘yids’,²⁴ by altering the
aspect of the X… Legation or of this or that department of the Foreign
Ministry, rendered these palaces retrospectively as mysterious as the
Temple of Jerusalem or the throne-room of Suze.²⁵ For the embassy the
young personnel of which came up as one to shake M. de Charlus’s hand,
M. de Vaugoubert adopted the wondering expression of Elise exclaiming in
_Esther_:

_Ciel! Quel nombreux essaim d’innocentes beautés_

_S’offre à mes yeux en foule et sort de tous côtés!_

_Quelle aimable pudeur sur leur visage est peinte!_²⁶

Then, anxious to be ‘better informed’, he smiled and cast a fatuously
questioning and concupiscent glance at M. de Charlus: ‘Oh come, but of
course,’ said M. de Charlus, with the learned expression of a scholar
talking to an ignoramus. Instantly, M. de Vaugoubert (which greatly
annoyed M. de Charlus) could no longer take his eyes off these young
secretaries, whom the Ambassador of X… to France, a habitual offender,
had not selected at random. M. de Vaugoubert fell silent, I could see
only his eyes. But, accustomed since childhood to attribute the language
of the classics, even to what is speechless, I made M. de Vaugoubert’s
eyes speak the lines in which Esther explains to Elise that, out of zeal
for his religion, Mordecai has wanted only girls who belonged to it to
attend on the Queen.

_Cependant son amour pour notre nation_

_A peuplé ce palais de filles de Sion,_

_Jeunes et tendres fleurs par le sort agitées,_

_Sous un ciel étranger comme moi transplantées._

_Dans un lieu séparé de profanes témoins_

_Il_ (the excellent ambassador) _met à les former son étude et ses
soins_.²⁷

M. de Vaugoubert finally spoke, other than by his glances. ‘Who knows,
he said mournfully, whether, in the country where I reside, the same
thing does not exist? – It’s likely, replied M. de Charlus, starting
with King Theodosius, although I don’t know anything positive about him.
– Oh no, absolutely not! – Then it’s not permitted to look like one to
that extent. And he has his fancy ways. He’s one of the “darling” kind,
the kind I detest most. I wouldn’t dare show myself with him in the
street. Anyway, you must certainly know him for what he is, it’s common
knowledge. – You’re totally mistaken about him. He’s charming as it
happens. The day when the agreement with France was signed, the King
embraced me. I have never been so moved. – That was the moment to tell
him what you wanted. – Oh, good God, how horrible, supposing he’d even
suspected! But I have no fears on that score.’

Words which I overheard, for I was not far away, and which led me to
recite in my head:

_Le roi jusqu’à ce jour ignore qui je suis,_

_Et ce secret toujours tient ma langue enchaînée_.²⁸

This dialogue, half mute, half spoken, had lasted only a few moments and
I had not yet taken more than a few steps into the drawing-rooms with
the Duchesse de Guermantes when a small dark-haired woman, extremely
pretty, stopped her: ‘I’d very much like to call on you. D’Annunzio²⁹
caught sight of you from a box and wrote a letter to the Princesse de T.
in which he says he’d never seen anything so lovely. He’d give his whole
life for ten minutes’ conversation with you. At all events, even if you
can’t or won’t, the letter is in my possession. You must fix a time for
us to meet. There are certain secret things I can’t say here. I can see
you don’t recognize me, she added, addressing herself to me; I met you
at the Princesse de Parme’s (where I had never been). The Russian
Emperor would like your father to be sent to Petersburg. If you were
able to come on Tuesday, Isvolsky³⁰ will in fact be there, he could talk
to you about it. I’ve a present to give you, darling, she added, turning
to the Duchesse, which I wouldn’t give to anyone except you. The
manuscripts of three of Ibsen’s plays,³¹ which he had his old nurse
bring me. I shall keep one and give you the other two.’

The Duc de Guermantes was not enchanted with these offers. Unsure
whether Ibsen or d’Annunzio were dead or alive, he could already see
writers and dramatists coming to call on his wife and putting her into
their works. Society people readily picture books to themselves as a
sort of cube, one face of which has been removed, so that the author
need waste no time in ‘bringing in’ the people he meets. This obviously
is underhand, and they are people of little worth. Admittedly, it would
not be without interest to meet them ‘in passing’, for thanks to them,
when you read a book or an article, you get to know the ‘inside story’,
can ‘remove the masks’. But for all that, the wisest course is to stick
to authors who are dead. The one author whom M. de Guermantes considered
‘perfectly proper’ was the gentleman who wrote the death notices in the
_Gaulois_.³² He at least contented himself with citing the name of M. de
Guermantes at the head of those persons remarked ‘among others’ at the
funerals where the Duc had signed the list. When the latter preferred
that his name should not appear, instead of signing he sent a letter of
condolence to the deceased person’s family, assuring them of the deep
sadness that he felt. Should this family then have inserted in the
newspaper: ‘Among the letters received, let us cite that from the Duc de
Guermantes, etc.’, this was not the fault of the gossip writer, but of
the son, brother or father of the person deceased, whom the Duc
described as _arrivistes_ and with whom he was determined to have no
further dealings (what he called, being unclear as to the meaning of
these locutions, ‘having a bone to pick’). The fact is that the names of
Ibsen and d’Annunzio, and their uncertain survival, brought a frown from
the Duc, not as yet far enough away from us not to have heard the sundry
civilities of Mme Timoléon d’Amoncourt. She was a charming woman, of a
quickness of mind, like her beauty, so captivating that one of these
alone would have been sufficient attraction. But, born outside the
circles in which she was now living and, after aspiring to start with
only to a literary salon, successively and exclusively the friend –
never the lover, her morals were of the purest – of each great writer
who gave her all his manuscripts and wrote books for her, chance having
introduced her into the Faubourg Saint-Germain, these literary
privileges were of service to her there. Her situation was such now that
she had no need to dispense any favours other than those bestowed by her
presence. But, having got used in the old days to doing services for
people, and to handling them tactfully, she had persevered, even though
it was no longer necessary. She always had a state secret to reveal to
you, a potentate whom you must meet, a water-colour by a master to offer
you. There was an element of falsehood certainly in all these futile
attractions, but they made of her life a comedy of scintillating
complexity and it was a fact that she had secured the appointment of
prefects and generals.

As she walked beside me, the Duchesse de Guermantes allowed the azure
light of her eyes to float in front of her, but undirected, so as to
avoid the people with whom she was keen not to come into contact, but
whom she could sometimes make out in the distance like a menacing reef.
We were advancing between a double hedge of guests who, aware that they
would never get to know ‘Oriane’, wanted at least, as a curiosity, to
point her out to their wives: ‘Ursule, quick, quick, come and see Madame
de Guermantes who’s talking with that young man.’ And you felt it would
not have taken much for them to climb up on to chairs so as to have a
better view, as at the 14 July parade or the Grand Prix.³³ It was not
that the Duchesse de Guermantes had a more aristocratic salon than her
cousin. The first was frequented by people whom the second would never
have wished to invite, above all because of her husband. She would never
have received Mme Alphonse de Rothschild, who, a close friend of Mme de
La Trémoïlle and of Mme de Sagan, as was Oriane herself, was often to be
seen at the last named’s. And the same went for Baron Hirsch,³⁴ whom the
Prince of Wales had brought to her house but not to that of the
Princesse, who would not have taken to him, as well as for a number of
great Bonapartist or even Republican celebrities, who interested the
Duchesse but whom the Prince, a convinced Royalist, would have refused
to receive. His anti-Semitism, being also a principle with him, made no
concessions to the fashionable, however highly accredited, and if he
received Swann, whose friend he had been from a long way back, being
moreover the only one of the Guermantes who addressed him as Swann and
not as Charles, it was because, knowing that Swann’s grandmother, a
Protestant married to a Jew, had been the mistress of the Duc de
Berri,³⁵ he tried, from time to time, to believe in the legend which had
it that Swann’s father was an illegitimate son of the Prince. On this
hypothesis, which was, however, false, Swann, the son of a Catholic, who
had himself been the son of a Bourbon and a Catholic woman, was
Christian through and through.

‘What, you don’t know these splendours?’ the Duchesse said to me,
referring to the house we were in. But having sung the praises of her
cousin’s ‘palace’, she hastened to add that she infinitely preferred her
own ‘humble abode’. ‘It’s admirable for _visiting_, here. But I’d die of
sadness if I had to stay and sleep in rooms where so many historical
events have taken place. It would have the effect on me of having
remained behind after closing time, of having been forgotten, in the
château of Blois or Fontainebleau or even at the Louvre, and of having
as my one recourse against unhappiness to tell myself that I’m in the
room where Monaldeschi was murdered.³⁶ As camomile tea, that wouldn’t
do. Hello, there’s Mme de Saint-Euverte. We had dinner there just the
other day. As it’s tomorrow she gives her big annual shindig, I thought
she’d have gone off to bed. But she can’t miss a party. If this one had
been taking place in the country, she’d have climbed into a delivery van
rather than not have gone to it.’

In point of fact, Mme de Saint-Euverte had come there, that evening,
less for the pleasure of not missing someone else’s party than to ensure
the success of her own, to recruit the final adherents and as it were
review _in extremis_ the troops who would the next day be manoeuvring
brilliantly at her ‘_garden-party_’. Because, for quite some years now,
the guests at the Saint-Euverte parties had been no longer at all the
same as in the old days. The female notabilities of the Guermantes
circle, at that time very thin on the ground, had – overwhelmed with
courtesies by their hostess – little by little brought their women
friends. At the same time, by her progressive hard work in parallel, but
in the opposite direction, Mme de Saint-Euverte had, year by year,
reduced the numbers of people unknown to the fashionable world. First
one, then another, had ceased to be seen there. For a time a system of
‘batches’ operated, which, thanks to parties over which a veil was cast,
enabled the reprobates to be invited to come and be entertained among
themselves, which excused her from inviting them together with the
people of substance. What cause for complaint could they have? Did they
not get (_panem et circenses_) petits fours and a fine programme of
music? And so, in some sort of symmetry with the two duchesses in exile
who, in the old days, when the Saint-Euverte salon made its bow, were to
be seen, like two caryatids, holding up its tottering ridgepiece, in
recent years, only two heterogeneous figures were to be made out,
mingling with the _beau monde_: old Mme de Cambremer and an architect’s
wife with a beautiful voice whom they were often obliged to ask to sing.
But no longer knowing anyone at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s, in mourning for
their lost companions, and feeling themselves to be in the way, they
looked as though they were ready to die of cold, like two swallows that
have not emigrated in time. And so the following year they were not
asked; Mme de Franquetot tried to intercede on behalf of her cousin, who
was so very fond of music. But since she was unable to obtain any
response on her behalf more explicit than the words: ‘But it’s always
possible to come in and listen to the music if it amuses you, there’s no
crime in that!’, Mme de Cambremer did not consider the invitation
sufficiently pressing and stayed away.

Such a transmutation having been effected by Mme de Saint-Euverte, from
a salon for lepers into a salon for great ladies (the latest form,
ultra-chic to all appearances, that it had taken), it might seem
surprising that the person who tomorrow would be giving the season’s
most brilliant party should have needed to come on the eve to address a
supreme appeal to her troops. But the fact was that the pre-eminence of
the Saint-Euverte salon existed only for those whose social life
consists merely in reading the accounts of matinées and soirées in the
_Gaulois_ or the _Figaro_, without ever having been to any of them. For
those socialites who encounter society only by way of the newspaper, the
enumeration of the Ambassadresses of England, Austria, etc., and the
Duchesses d’Uzès,³⁷ de La Trémoïlle, etc., etc., was enough for them
readily to imagine the Saint-Euverte salon to be the first in Paris,
whereas it was one of the last. Not that these accounts were untruthful.
The majority of the people named had indeed been present. But every one
of them had come as a result of entreaties, politenesses and favours,
and with a sense of doing Mme de Saint-Euverte infinite honour. Such
salons, less sought-after than shunned, to which you go only in the line
of duty as it were, take in only the female readers of the ‘Society’
column. They slide over a party, a truly fashionable one, to which the
hostess, who might have had all the duchesses, who crave being ‘among
the chosen’, has asked only two or three, and has not put the names of
her guests in the newspaper. And so these women, either misunderstanding
or else scorning the influence that publicity has today acquired, are
fashionable for the Queen of Spain, but unrecognized by the crowd,
because the first knows and the second do not know who they are.

Mme de Saint-Euverte was not among these women, but had come, like a
good honey-bee, to gather all who had been invited for the following
day. M. de Charlus was not invited, he had always refused to go to her
house. But he had quarrelled with so many people that Mme de
Saint-Euverte was able to put this down to his character.

True, if Oriane alone had been there, Mme de Saint-Euverte need not have
put herself out, since the invitation had been given verbally, and
accepted moreover with that charming and deceitful good grace, the
triumphant practitioners of which are the academicians, from whose house
the candidate emerges much moved and never doubting that he may count on
their vote.³⁸ But others were there besides. The Prince d’Agrigente,
would he be coming? And Mme de Durfort?³⁹ And so, in order to keep a
weather eye open for squalls, Mme de Saint-Euverte had thought it more
expedient to transport herself there in person; insinuating with some,
imperative with others, to all she gave notice in veiled terms of
unimaginable amusements, the like of which would not be seen again, and
to each she promised that at her house they would find the person that
they longed, or the personage they needed, to meet. And the sort of
function with which she was invested on this one occasion in the year –
like certain magistracies in the ancient world – of someone who will
tomorrow be giving the most notable _garden-party_ of the season,
conferred on her a momentary authority. Her lists were made up and
closed, so that, as she moved slowly through the Princesse’s
drawing-rooms in order to pour successively into each ear: ‘You won’t
forget me tomorrow,’ she experienced the ephemeral triumph of turning
away, while continuing to smile, when she caught sight of some ugly
duckling who was to be avoided or a country bumpkin admitted to
‘Gilbert’s’ on the strength of having been a school-friend but whose
presence would add nothing to the _garden-party_. She preferred not to
speak to him so as to be able to say afterwards: ‘I gave out my
invitations verbally, and unfortunately I didn’t bump into you.’ So did
she, a mere Saint-Euverte, her eyes darting this way and that, ‘sort
through’ the component parts of the Princesse’s soirée. And in so doing,
she saw herself as a true Duchesse de Guermantes.

It has to be said that neither was the latter as liberal as one might
have thought with her greetings and her smiles. On the one hand, when
she refused them, it was no doubt deliberately: ‘But she gets on my
nerves, she would say, am I going to be obliged to talk to her about her
reception for a whole hour?’

A very swarthy Duchesse was seen to go past, whose ugliness and
stupidity, and certain irregularities of behaviour, had exiled her, not
from society but from certain inner circles of the fashionable. ‘Oh,’
murmured Mme de Guermantes, with the exact, disabused glance of the
connoisseur being shown a piece of paste jewellery, ‘they entertain that
here!’ Merely at the sight of this semi-imbecile, whose face was
encumbered by too many speckles of black hair, Mme de Guermantes
estimated this to be a second-rate soirée. She had been brought up with,
but had broken off all relations with this lady; she replied to her
greeting with the curtest of nods. ‘I don’t understand, she said to me,
as if to excuse herself, why Marie-Gilbert should invite us with all
these dregs. You could say there are people here from every parish. It
was far better organized at Mélanie Pourtalès’s.⁴⁰ She could have the
Holy Synod and the Oratorian temple⁴¹ if the fancy took her, but at
least she didn’t make us go on those days.’ But, in many cases, it was
out of timidity, of fear of having a scene with her husband, who refused
to let her entertain artists and the like (many of whom were
Marie-Gilbert’s protégés, you had to be careful not to be accosted by
some illustrious German soprano), out of a certain fear also in respect
of the nationalism which, possessing as she did, like M. de Charlus, the
Guermantes spirit, she despised from the social point of view (in order
to glorify the general staff, a plebeian general was now accorded
precedence ahead of certain dukes), but to which, knowing herself to be
adjudged a _mal pensante_, she nevertheless made large concessions, to
the point of dreading having to hold out her hand to Swann in this
anti-Semitic circle. In this respect she was very soon reassured, having
learned that the Prince had not allowed Swann to enter but had had ‘a
sort of altercation’ with him. There was no danger of her having to make
conversation in public with ‘poor Charles’, whom she preferred to
cherish in private.

‘And who again is that one?’ exclaimed Mme de Guermantes, on seeing a
rather strange-looking short lady, in a black dress so simple you might
have supposed her to have fallen on hard times, make her, along with her
husband, a deep curtsy. She did not recognize her and, insolent as she
was capable of being, drew herself up as if offended, and looked at her
without replying: ‘Who or what is that person, Basin?’ she asked, with a
look of astonishment, while M. de Guermantes, in order to atone for
Oriane’s rudeness, bowed to the lady and shook her husband’s hand. ‘But,
it’s Mme de Chaussepierre, you were very rude. – I know nothing of any
Chaussepierre. – The nephew of old mother Chanlivault. – I know nothing
of any of them. Who is the woman, why does she curtsy to me? – But you
know only too well, it’s Mme de Charleval’s daughter, Henriette
Montmorency. – Oh, but I knew her mother very well, she was charming,
very quick-witted. Why did she marry all these people I don’t know? You
say her name’s Mme de Chaussepierre?’ she said, spelling out this last
word with a questioning air, and as if she were afraid of getting it
wrong. The Duc looked severely at her. ‘It’s not so ridiculous as you
appear to think being called Chaussepierre! Old Chaussepierre was the
brother of the aforenamed Charleval,⁴² of Mme de Sennecour and of the
Vicomtesse du Merlerault. They’re out of the top drawer. – Oh, stop,’
exclaimed the Duchesse, who, like an animal-tamer, never wanted to look
as though she were allowing herself to be intimidated by the savage
beast’s voracious stare. ‘Basin, you delight me. I don’t know where
you’ve dug those names up from, but I compliment you heartily. I may not
have known Chaussepierre but I’ve read Balzac, you’re not the only one,
and I’ve even read Labiche.⁴³ I appreciate Chanlivault, I don’t dislike
Charleval, but I confess that du Merlerault is the masterpiece. Let’s
admit, moreover, that Chaussepierre isn’t bad either. You’ve collected
all of them, it’s not possible. You who want to write a book, she said
to me, you ought to hang on to Charleval and du Merlerault. You won’t
find any better. – He’ll quite simply find himself in court and will go
to prison; you’re giving him very bad advice, Oriane. – I hope for his
sake that he has younger people he can call on if he feels like asking
for bad advice, and above all following it. But if the worst thing he
means to do is to write a book!’ Some little distance from us, a
marvellous, proud young woman stood quietly out in a white dress, all
diamonds and tulle. Mme de Guermantes looked at her, talking before a
whole group magnetized by her grace. ‘Your sister is the belle of the
ball; she looks charming this evening,’ she said, as she was taking a
chair, to the Prince de Chimay, who was passing.⁴⁴ Colonel de
Froberville (he had the general of the same name for an uncle) came and
sat down next to us, as did M. de Bréauté, while M. de Vaugoubert (out
of an excess of politeness that he maintained even on the tennis court,
where, by dint of asking for permission from anyone of importance before
striking the ball, he inevitably caused his own side to lose the game)
went waddling back to M. de Charlus (up until now almost enveloped by
the immense skirt of the Comtesse Molé, whom he professed to admire
above all other women), and, by chance, at the very instant when several
members of a diplomatic mission new to Paris were greeting the Baron. At
the sight of a young, particularly intelligent-looking secretary, M. de
Vaugoubert fixed M. de Charlus with an expansive smile that was patently
asking a single question. M. de Charlus would gladly have compromised
anyone else perhaps, but to feel compromised himself by this smile
coming from another and which could have only one meaning, exasperated
him. ‘I have absolutely no idea, I must ask you to keep your curiosity
to yourself. It leaves me more than cold. Moreover, in this particular
instance, you are committing a blunder of the first magnitude. I believe
that young man to be the exact opposite.’ Here, M. de Charlus, annoyed
at having been given away by a fool, was not speaking the truth. Had the
Baron been speaking truthfully, the secretary would have been the
exception in that embassy. It was made up, indeed, of very different
personalities, several of them extremely second-rate, so that, had you
been searching for what the motive might have been for the choice that
had fallen on them, you could have discovered only inversion. By setting
at the head of this small diplomatic Sodom an ambassador who, on the
contrary, loved women with the comic exaggeration of a music-hall
compère putting his battalions of transvestites through their regulation
paces, they seemed to have been obeying the law of opposites. Despite
the evidence of his own eyes, he did not believe in inversion. He gave
instant proof of this by marrying his sister off to a _chargé
d’affaires_ whom he quite wrongly believed went after tarts. From then
on he became something of an embarrassment and was soon replaced by a
new Excellency who ensured the homogeneity of the whole. Other embassies
sought to compete with this one, but could not dispute the prize (as at
the _concours général_,⁴⁵ when a particular _lycée_ always wins), and
more than ten years had to pass before, heterogeneous attachés having
been introduced into this very perfect whole, another embassy was
finally able to snatch the fateful palm and march at the head.

Reassured as to her fear of having to talk with Swann, Mme de Guermantes
now felt only curiosity concerning the conversation he had had with his
host. ‘Do you know what about? the Duc asked M. de Bréauté. – I did
hear, replied the latter, that it was à propos a playlet that the writer
Bergotte put on at their house. It was a delight, anyway. But it seems
the actor was got up to look like Gilbert, whom the good Sir Bergotte
may anyway have wanted in fact to portray. – I say, I’d have been amused
to see Gilbert taken off, said the Duchesse, smiling wistfully. – It was
about that little performance, M. de Bréauté went on, thrusting forward
his rodent’s jaw, that Gilbert wanted to have it out with Swann, who
merely replied, which everyone thought very witty, “But not at all, it’s
nothing like you, you’re much more ridiculous than that!” It seems,
moreover, M. de Bréauté went on, that the little play was a delight. Mme
Molé was there, she was vastly amused. – What, Mme Molé goes there? said
the Duchesse in astonishment. Oh, it’s Mémé who’ll have arranged that.
It’s what always ends up happening in such places. One fine day all the
world starts going there, and I, who have deliberately excluded myself
on principle, I find myself all alone feeling bored in my little
corner.’ By now, after the account M. de Bréauté had just given them,
the Duchesse de Guermantes had, as can be seen, adopted a fresh point of
view (if not on the Swann salon, then at least on the hypothesis of
meeting Swann in a few minutes’ time). ‘The explanation you’re giving
us, said Colonel de Froberville to M. de Bréauté, is a complete
fabrication. I’ve my own reasons for knowing so. The Prince quite simply
gave Swann a good talking-to, and gave him to understand, as our
forefathers put it, that he needn’t show himself at the house again,
given the opinions that he flaunts. And so far as I’m concerned, my
uncle Gilbert was right a thousand times over, not simply to tell him
off like that, but should have had done with a declared Dreyfusard more
than six months ago.’

Poor M. de Vaugoubert, having on this occasion gone from being a too
sluggish player to being the inert tennis-ball itself, which is launched
without ceremony, found himself being projected towards the Duchesse de
Guermantes, to whom he presented his respects. He was none too well
received, Oriane existing in the conviction that all the diplomats – or
politicians – in her world were halfwits.

M. de Froberville had inevitably benefited from the favourable position
in society accorded of late to military men. Unfortunately, if the woman
whom he had married was a very genuine relation of the Guermantes, she
was also an extremely poor one, and as he himself had lost his money,
they had scarcely any connections and were among the people who got left
on one side, except on big occasions, when they had the good fortune to
lose or to marry off a relation. Then, they truly became part of the
communion of high society, like those nominal Catholics who approach the
Lord’s Table only once a year. Their material situation would have been
wretched even had Mme de Saint-Euverte, loyal to the affection she had
had for the late General de Froberville, not helped the household out in
every way, providing the two young daughters with outfits and
amusements. But the Colonel, good fellow though he was held to be, was
not the soul of gratitude. He was envious of the splendours of a
benefactress who herself celebrated them tirelessly and unrestrainedly.
For him, his wife and his children, the annual _garden-party_ was a
wonderful pleasure that they would not have wanted to miss for all the
gold in the world, but a pleasure poisoned by the thought of the
vainglorious delight Mme de Saint-Euverte derived from it. The
announcement of this _garden-party_ in the newspapers, which then, after
a detailed account, added in Machiavellian fashion: ‘We shall have more
to say about this brilliant entertainment’, the complementary details
about the costumes, given over several successive days, all this so hurt
the Frobervilles that, somewhat starved of pleasures but who knew they
could rely on that of the matinée, they got to the point each year of
hoping that its success might be spoilt by bad weather, of consulting
the barometer and anticipating with joy the first hints of a storm that
might cause the party to be a failure.

‘I shan’t discuss politics with you, Froberville, said M. de Guermantes,
but so far as Swann is concerned, I can say frankly that his behaviour
towards us has been unspeakable. He was taken up by society in the old
days by ourselves and by the Duc de Chartres,⁴⁶ and they tell me he’s
openly Dreyfusard. I’d never have believed it of him, him, a discerning
gourmet, a positive mind, a collector, a lover of old books, a member of
the Jockey Club, a man highly respected on all sides, a connoisseur of
good addresses who used to send us the best port you can drink, a
dilettante, a family man. Oh, I’ve been badly let down. I’m not speaking
of myself, it’s agreed I’m an old fool whose opinion doesn’t count, some
sort of down-and-out, but, if only for Oriane’s sake, he shouldn’t have
done that, he should have openly disowned the Jews and the condemned
man’s supporters.’

‘Yes, after the friendship my wife has always displayed towards him,’
the Duc went on, who obviously considered that to sentence Dreyfus for
high treason, whatever opinion you might hold in your heart of hearts as
to his guilt, constituted a form of gratitude for the way one had been
received in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, ‘he should have broken ranks.
For, ask Oriane, she had genuine friendship for him.’ The Duchesse,
thinking that a calm, ingenuous tone would lend her words a more
dramatic and sincere quality, said in the voice of a schoolgirl, as if
simply allowing the truth to issue from her mouth, and giving her eyes
alone a somewhat melancholy expression: ‘But that’s true, I’ve no reason
to hide that I felt a sincere affection for Charles – There, you see,
I’m not putting words into her mouth. And after that, he takes
ingratitude to the point of being a Dreyfusard!’

‘Talking of Dreyfusards, I said, it seems that Prince Von is one. – Ah,
you do well to bring him up, exclaimed M. de Guermantes, I was about to
forget that he’s asked me to go and dine on Monday. But whether he’s a
Dreyfusard or not is all one to me, since he’s a foreigner. I don’t care
two hoots. With a Frenchman, it’s another matter. It’s true Swann is a
Jew. But up until today– forgive me, Froberville – I had been
weak-minded enough to believe that a Jew can be a Frenchman, an
honourable Jew, I mean, a man of the world. Now Swann was that in the
full force of the word. Well, he’s forcing me to acknowledge I was
mistaken, since he’s taking the side of this Dreyfus (who, guilty or
not, is in no way part of his circle, and whom he can never have met)
against a society that had adopted him, had treated him as one of its
own. There’s no getting away from it, we’d all have vouched for Swann,
I’d have answered for his patriotism as for my own. And this is how he
rewards us! I confess I would never have expected it, not from him. I
thought better of him. He had a quick wit (in his own way, of course).
I’m well aware he’d already committed the insanity of his shameful
marriage. By the way, do you know someone who was greatly hurt by
Swann’s marriage? It was my wife. Oriane often has what I shall call an
affectation of insensitivity. But deep down, she feels with an
extraordinary intensity.’ Mme de Guermantes, overjoyed at this analysis
of her character, listened to it wearing a modest expression but did not
say a word, not liking to acquiesce in the eulogy, but fearing above all
to interrupt it. M. de Guermantes might have spoken for an hour on this
subject and she would no more have moved than if they had been making
music for her. ‘Well, I recall when she heard about Swann’s marriage,
she felt offended; she decided it was wrong of someone to whom we had
displayed so much friendship. She was very fond of Swann; she was
greatly upset. Weren’t you, Oriane?’ Mme de Guermantes thought she must
reply to so direct a challenge, on a point of fact that would enable
her, without appearing to, to confirm the praises that she sensed were
at an end. In a simple, diffident tone, and with an expression all the
more studied for seeking to appear ‘felt’, she said demurely and softly:
‘It’s true, Basin is not mistaken. – Yet, it still wasn’t the same
thing. But what do you expect, love is love, although in my view it
should stay within certain bounds. I might excuse a young man who’s
still wet behind the ears, letting himself be carried away by utopias.
But Swann, an intelligent man, of a proven refinement, a shrewd
connoisseur of paintings, a close friend of the Duc de Chartres, of
Gilbert himself!’ The tone in which M. de Guermantes had said this was
yet perfectly sympathetic, with no hint of the vulgarity he too often
showed. He spoke with a faintly indignant sadness, but everything about
him breathed that gentle gravity which constitutes the broad and
unctuous charm of certain figures in Rembrandt, the burgomaster Six⁴⁷
for example. You felt that the question of the immorality of Swann’s
conduct over the Affair did not even arise for the Duc, so beyond all
doubt was it; he had experienced the affliction of a father seeing one
of his children, for whose education he has made the greatest
sacrifices, wilfully throwing away the magnificent situation he has
created for him and, by indiscretions that the family’s principles or
prejudices can not allow, bringing dishonour on a respected name. It was
true that M. de Guermantes had not manifested so profound and sorrowful
an astonishment earlier on, when learning that Saint-Loup was a
Dreyfusard. But for one thing he looked on his nephew as a young man who
had taken the wrong path, and could do nothing that would surprise him
until he had mended his ways, whereas Swann was what M. de Guermantes
called ‘a level-headed man, a man holding a position of the first rank’.
Then again, and especially, quite some time had passed during which if,
from the historical point of view, events had seemed in part to justify
the Dreyfusist case, the anti-Dreyfusard opposition had become twice as
violent and, from being purely political at the outset, had become
social. It was now a question of militarism, of patriotism, and the
waves of anger whipped up in society had had time to acquire the force
they never have at the beginning of a storm. ‘You see, M. de Guermantes
went on, even from the point of view of his beloved Jews, since he
insists absolutely on supporting them, Swann has made a blunder of
incalculable import. He is proving that they are all secretly united and
are somehow obliged to lend their support to someone of their own race,
even if they don’t know him. That is a public menace. We’ve obviously
been too easy-going, and the gaffe Swann is committing will reverberate
all the more inasmuch as he was held in high esteem, received even, and
was just about the only Jew whom one knew. People will say to
themselves: _Ab uno disce omnes_.’⁴⁸ (The satisfaction of having found
in his memory, at the appointed moment, so opportune a quotation, alone
caused a proud smile to illuminate the melancholy of the great nobleman
betrayed.)

I had a strong desire to know what exactly had transpired between the
Prince and Swann, and to see the latter, if he had not yet left the
soirée. ‘I must tell you, the Duchesse replied, to whom I had mentioned
this desire, that I am not myself excessively anxious to see him because
it seems, judging by what I was told a short while ago at Mme de
Saint-Euverte’s, that he would like before he dies for me to make the
acquaintance of his wife and daughter. Heavens, it grieves me infinitely
that he should be ill, but I hope first of all that it’s not as serious
as all that. And then, that’s not after all a reason, because it would
really be too simple. A writer devoid of talent would only have to say:
“Vote for me at the Academy because my wife is going to die and I want
to give her this last pleasure.” There wouldn’t be salons any more if
one was obliged to make the acquaintance of all the dying. My coachman
could use it on me: “My daughter’s very ill, get me an invitation to the
Princesse de Parme’s.”⁴⁹ I adore Charles, and it would upset me greatly
to refuse him, which is why I prefer to avoid his asking me. I hope with
all my heart that he’s not dying, as he says he is, but truly, were that
to happen, it would not be the moment for me to make the acquaintance of
those two creatures who’ve deprived me of the most agreeable of my
friends these past fifteen years, and whom he would leave on my hands at
a time when I wouldn’t even be able to take advantage of it to see him,
since he’d be dead!’

But M. de Bréauté had not ceased to ponder the contradiction inflicted
on him by Colonel de Froberville. ‘I don’t doubt the accuracy of your
account, my dear friend, he said, but I had mine from a good source. It
was the Prince de la Tour d’Auvergne who related it to me. – I’m
astonished that a knowledgeable man like yourself should still say the
Prince de la Tour d’Auvergne, the Duc de Guermantes broke in, you know
he’s nothing of the kind. There’s only one member of that family left.
That’s Oriane’s uncle, the Duc de Bouillon.⁵⁰ – The brother of Mme de
Villeparisis?’ I asked, recalling that the latter had been a Mlle de
Bouillon. ‘Exactly so. Oriane, Mme de Lambresac is wishing you good
day.’

Indeed, a weak smile could be seen from time to time forming and
vanishing like a shooting star, intended by the Duchesse de Lambresac
for some person whom she had recognized. But instead of taking on
definition as an active affirmation, in a language mute but clear, this
smile was almost immediately drowned in a sort of ideal ecstasy that
could discern nothing, while the head was inclined in a vacuous gesture
of benediction reminiscent of that inclined towards the crowd of
communicants by a somewhat doddery prelate. Mme de Lambresac was in no
way doddery. But I was already familiar with this particular kind of
obsolete refinement. In Combray and in Paris, all my grandmother’s women
friends were in the habit, at social gatherings, of greeting one another
wearing as seraphic an expression as if they had just caught sight of
someone of their acquaintance in church, at the moment of the Elevation
or during a funeral, and were bidding them a limp good day that ended in
a prayer. And some words of M. de Guermantes’s were about to complete
the comparison I was making. ‘But you’ve seen the Duc de Bouillon, M. de
Guermantes said to me. He was leaving my library a little while ago as
you were going in, a gentleman short in stature, and white-haired.’ He
it was whom I had taken for some petty bourgeois from Combray but in
whom I could now discern, on reflection, the resemblance to Mme de
Villeparisis. The similarity between the evanescent greetings of the
Duchesse de Lambresac and those of my grandmother’s friends had begun to
interest me, by demonstrating that in narrow and enclosed social
circles, whether among the petty bourgeoisie or the high nobility, the
old ways persist, enabling us to rediscover, like an archaeologist, how
people may have been brought up, and the element of soul that it
reflects, in the days of the Vicomte d’Arlincourt and Loïsa Puget.⁵¹
Better still, the perfect conformity in appearance between a petty
bourgeois of Combray of the same age and the Duc de Bouillon now
reminded me (what had already struck me so forcibly when I saw
Saint-Loup’s maternal grandfather, the Duc de la Rochefoucauld, on a
daguerreotype where, in dress, expression and manner, he was exactly
like my great-uncle) that social, or indeed individual, differences
merge over time into the uniformity of an epoch. The truth is that the
similarity in dress, and the spirit of the age as it is echoed by the
face, occupy so much more significant a place in someone than their
caste, which occupies a large place only in the person in question’s
self-esteem and in the imagination of others, that, to be made aware
that a great nobleman of Louis-Philippe’s time differs less from a
bourgeois of Louis-Philippe’s time than from a great nobleman of the
time of Louis XV, there is no need to walk the galleries of the Louvre.

At that moment, a long-haired Bavarian musician, a protégé of the
Princesse de Guermantes, greeted Oriane. The latter replied by inclining
her head, but the Duc, enraged at the sight of his wife saying good
evening to someone he did not know, who had so very strange a look about
him, and who, so far as M. de Guermantes thought he knew, had a very bad
reputation, turned to his wife with a terrible and inquisitorial air, as
if to say: ‘Who is this Ostrogoth?’ Poor Mme de Guermantes’s situation
was already somewhat complicated, and had the musician felt some pity
for that martyred spouse, he would have taken himself off as quickly as
possible. But, whether out of a desire not to tolerate the humiliation
that had just been inflicted on him in public, in the midst of his
oldest friends from the Duc’s circle, whose presence may well have been
in part the reason for his silent bow, and to show that it was by right,
and not without knowing her, that he had greeted Mme de Guermantes, or
whether in obedience to the obscure but irresistible inspiration of his
gaffe, which – at a moment when he should rather have relied on his wits
– urged him on to apply protocol to the letter, the musician approached
Mme de Guermantes more closely still and said: ‘Madame la Duchesse, I
would like to solicit the honour of being presented to the Duc.’ Mme de
Guermantes was most unhappy. But in the end, for all that she was a
deceived wife, she was still the Duchesse de Guermantes and could not
appear to have been robbed of her right to introduce people whom she
knew to her husband. ‘Basin, she said, allow me to present M.
d’Herweck.’ ‘I shan’t ask you whether you’re going tomorrow to Mme de
Saint-Euverte’s, said Colonel de Froberville to Mme de Guermantes, in
order to dispel the uncomfortable impression produced by M. d’Herweck’s
untimely request. The whole of Paris will be there.’ Meanwhile, turning
in a single movement and as if he had no joints towards the tactless
musician, the Duc de Guermantes, square on to him, monumental,
unspeaking, wrathful, like Jove the Thunderer, remained thus without
moving for several seconds, his eyes blazing with anger and
astonishment, his frizzy hair seeming to emerge from a crater. Then, as
if in the heat of an impulse that had alone enabled him to achieve the
civility demanded of him, and after having seemed by his defiant posture
to attest to those present that he did not know the Bavarian musician,
he crossed his two white-gloved hands behind his back, tipped himself
forward and dealt the musician a bow so profound, imbued with so much
rage and stupefaction, so abrupt, so violent, that the trembling artist
recoiled even as he leaned forward so as not to receive a formidable
butt in the stomach. ‘But it’s just that I shan’t be in Paris, replied
the Duchesse to Colonel de Froberville. I must tell you (which I
shouldn’t admit) that I have reached my present age without having seen
the stained-glass windows at Montfort-l’Amaury.⁵² It’s shameful but
there you are. So, to make amends for this culpable neglect, I’ve
promised myself to go and see them tomorrow.’ M. de Bréauté gave a
knowing smile. He understood indeed that, if the Duchesse had been able
to go on not knowing the stained-glass windows of Montfort-l’Amaury up
until her present age, this artistic visit had not all of a sudden taken
on the urgent character of an ‘emergency’ operation and might, without
danger, having been deferred for more than twenty-five years, been put
back by twenty-four hours. The plan the Duchesse had formed was simply
to decree, in the Guermantes manner, that the Saint-Euverte salon was
decidedly not a truly respectable house, but a house to which you were
invited so that you could be paraded in the account given in the
_Gaulois_, a house that would confer a badge of supreme elegance on
those women, or, in any event, on that woman if there were only one of
them, who would not be seen there. The tactful amusement of M. de
Bréauté, coupled with the poetic pleasure that society people felt when
they saw Mme de Guermantes doing things that their own lesser situation
did not allow them to imitate, but the mere spectacle of which produced
in them the smile of the peasant tied to his glebe, who sees men freer
and more fortunate than himself passing above his head, this refined
pleasure bore no connection to the disguised but frenetic delight at
once experienced by M. de Froberville.

The efforts M. de Froberville was making so that his laughter might not
be heard had made him go as red as a rooster, in spite of which he
interspersed his words with hiccups of joy as he exclaimed in a
compassionate tone: ‘Oh, poor aunt Saint-Euverte, what a song and dance
she’s going to make! No, the unfortunate woman isn’t going to get her
Duchesse, what a blow! It’s enough to make her turn up her toes!’ he
added, doubled up with laughter. And in his euphoria he could not
prevent himself from drumming his heels and rubbing his hands. Smiling
out of one eye and only one corner of her mouth at M. de Froberville,
whose friendly intentions she appreciated without finding him any less
mortally tedious, Mme de Guermantes finally decided to leave him.

‘Listen, I’m going to _have_ to wish you good evening,’ she said,
getting to her feet with an air of melancholy resignation, as if this
for her were a misfortune. Beneath the incantation of her blue eyes, her
softly musical voice put one in mind of the poetic lament of a fairy.
‘Basin wants me to go and see Marie for a bit.’ In point of fact, she
had had enough of listening to Froberville, who had not ceased envying
her going to Montfort-l’Amaury, when she knew full well that this was
the first he had heard of the stained-glass and, what was more, that he
would not have relinquished the Saint-Euverte matinée for anything in
the world. ‘Goodbye, I’ve hardly spoken to you, that’s how it is in
society, we don’t meet, we don’t say the things we’d like to say to one
another; anyway, it’s the same everywhere in life. Let’s hope it’ll be
better organized after we’re dead. At least we won’t always have to wear
low-cut dresses. Yet who knows? Perhaps we shall show off our bones and
our worms on big occasions. Why not? I say, look at old mother
Rampillon, d’you see any great difference between that and a skeleton in
an open dress? It’s true she has every right, she’s at least a hundred
years old. She was already one of those sacred monsters I refused to
curtsy to when I was starting out in society. I thought she’d died long
since; which would as it happens be the one explanation for the
spectacle she’s offering us. It’s impressive and liturgical. Pure “Campo
Santo!” ’⁵³ The Duchesse had left Froberville; he came closer: ‘I’d like
one last word with you.’ A little irritated: ‘What is it now?’ she said
haughtily. And he, having feared that she might change her mind about
Montfort-l’Amaury at the last minute: ‘I didn’t dare mention it on
account of Mme de Saint-Euverte, so as not to cause her any distress,
but since you’re not anticipating going, I can tell you I’m glad for
your sake, because they’ve got measles in the house! – Oh, good Lord!
said Oriane, who was afraid of diseases. But that doesn’t worry me, I’ve
already had it. You can’t get it twice. – It’s the doctors who say that;
I know people who’ve had it up to four times. Anyway, you’ve been
warned.’ As for him, he would need actually to have had this fictitious
measles and to be confined to his bed with it to resign himself to
missing the Saint-Euverte party, looked forward to these many months. He
would have the pleasure of seeing so many of the fashionable there, the
greater pleasure of confirming that certain things had gone wrong, and
the pleasure above all of being able to boast for a long time to come of
having rubbed shoulders with the first and, by either exaggerating or
inventing them, of deploring the second.

I took advantage of the fact that the Duchesse had changed her position
to stand up also, so as to make my way to the smoking-room and inquire
after Swann. ‘Don’t believe a word of what Babal’s been recounting, she
said to me. Never would the little Molé have gone poking her nose in
there. They tell us that to lead us on. They receive no one and are
invited nowhere. He himself admits it: “The two of us remain on our own
by the fire.” Because he always says “we”, not like the King but on
behalf of his wife, I don’t insist. But I’m very well informed,’ the
Duchesse added. She and I passed two young men whose great but
dissimilar beauty had its origins in the same woman. These were the two
sons of Mme de Surgis, the Duc de Guermantes’s new mistress. They were
resplendent with their mother’s perfections, but each with a different
perfection. Into one there had passed, sinuous now in a male body, Mme
de Surgis’s regal bearing, and the same ardent, reddish, sacred pallor
had flowed into the marmoreal cheeks of both the mother and this son;
but his brother had received the Greek brow, the perfect nose, the
statuesque neck, the boundless gaze; formed thus from the diverse gifts
allotted by the goddess, their twofold beauty offered the abstract
pleasure of reflecting that the cause of this beauty lay outside them;
it was as if their mother’s principal attributes had been incarnated in
two different bodies; that one of these young men was his mother’s
stature and her complexion, the other her gaze, like those divine beings
who were nothing more than the Strength and the Beauty of Jupiter or
Minerva. Full of respect for M. de Guermantes, of whom they used to say:
‘He’s a great friend of our parents’, the older one nevertheless thought
it prudent not to come and greet the Duchesse, whom he knew, without
perhaps understanding the reason, felt hostility towards his mother, and
on seeing us he turned his head slightly away. The younger one, who
always imitated his brother because, being stupid and short-sighted into
the bargain, he did not dare have an opinion of his own, inclined his
head at the same angle, and the two of them glided towards the
card-room, one behind the other, like two allegorical figures.

Just as I arrived in this room, I was stopped by the Marquise de Citri,
beautiful still though practically foaming at the mouth. Quite noble by
birth, she had sought and made a brilliant match by marrying M. de
Citri, whose great-grandmother was an Aumale-Lorraine.⁵⁴ But this
satisfaction no sooner experienced, her negative character had led her
to develop a deep dislike of people in high society, which did not
absolutely rule out a social life. Not only, at a soirée, would she pour
scorn on everyone, but this mockery had something so violent about it
that even her laugh was insufficiently acerbic and turned into a
guttural hissing: ‘Oh! she said to me, pointing to the Duchesse de
Guermantes, who had just left me and was already some little way off,
what staggers me is that she can lead this sort of life.’ Were these the
words of an infuriated saint, astonished that the gentiles should not
come to the truth of their own accord, or of an anarchist thirsting for
bloodshed? At all events, such an apostrophe had no possible
justification. In the first place, the ‘life’ that Mme de Guermantes led
differed very little (indignation apart) from Mme de Citri’s own life.
Mme de Citri was astounded to find the Duchesse capable of this mortal
sacrifice: of attending one of Marie-Gilbert’s soirées. It has to be
said that, in this particular instance, Mme de Citri was very fond of
the Princesse, who was indeed very good-natured, and that she knew she
was giving her great pleasure by attending her soirée. Thus, in order to
come to this party, she had cancelled a ballerina whom she thought had
genius and who was due to initiate her into the mysteries of Russian
choreography. Another reason that somewhat devalued the concentrated
fury felt by Mme de Citri when she saw Oriane greeting one or other
guest is that, although at a much less advanced stage, Mme de Guermantes
displayed the symptoms of the disease that was ravaging Mme de Citri. We
have seen in any case that she had been carrying the germs of it since
birth. Being more intelligent than Mme de Citri, Mme de Guermantes would
have had better title than her to this nihilism (which was not only
social), but it is a fact that certain virtues help us to tolerate our
neighbour’s failings rather than contributing to the pain that these
cause us; a man of great ability will ordinarily pay less attention to
other people’s foolishness than would a fool. We have described the
Duchesse’s kind of cleverness at sufficient length to persuade anyone
that, if it had nothing in common with high intelligence, it was at
least cleverness, a cleverness adroit at employing (like a translator)
different forms of syntax. But nothing of the sort seemed to entitle Mme
de Citri to despise qualities so similar to her own. She considered
everyone to be an idiot, but in her conversation, or in her letters, she
showed herself inferior rather to the people whom she treated with such
disdain. She had, moreover, so great a need to destroy that, once she
had more or less renounced society, the pleasures she then sought after
underwent, one after the other, her terrible powers of dissolution.
Having abandoned soirées for musical evenings, she started saying: ‘Do
you like listening to that, to music? Good Lord, it depends on the
moment. But it can be so very tedious! I mean, Beethoven, _la
barbe_!’⁵⁵With Wagner, then with Franck, and Debussy, she did not even
trouble to say ‘_la barbe_’ but was content to pass her hand across her
face, like a barber. Soon, what was tedious was everything. ‘Beautiful
things, they’re so tedious! Paintings, they’re enough to drive you mad…
How right you are, it’s so tedious, writing letters!’ In the end it was
life itself that she declared to us was a bore, without one quite
knowing from where she was taking her term of comparison.

I do not know whether it was on account of what the Duchesse de
Guermantes, on the first evening when I had dined with her, had said
about this room, but the card-room or smoking-room, with its illustrated
paving, its tripods, its faces of gods and animals that stared at you,
the sphinxes lying along the arms of the seats, and especially the
immense marble or enamelled mosaic table, covered with symbolic signs
roughly copied from Egyptian or Etruscan art, had the effect on me of a
veritable magician’s cell. And on a seat drawn up to the sparkling
augural table, M. de Charlus, touching none of the cards himself and
oblivious to what was going on around him, incapable of noticing that I
had just entered, seemed exactly like a magician applying the full force
of his will-power and his reasoning to the casting of a horoscope. Not
only were his eyes, like those of a Pythoness on her tripod, starting
from his head, but, so that nothing might come to distract him from
labours that required the cessation of the simplest movements, he had
(like a calculator who means to do nothing else until such time as he
has resolved his problem) put down beside him the cigar which, a short
while before, he had had in his mouth but which he no longer had the
necessary freedom of mind to smoke. On remarking the two crouched
divinities borne on its arms by the chair set facing him, you might have
thought that the Baron was seeking to solve the riddle of the Sphinx,
had it not been rather that of a young and living Oedipus, sitting in
that selfsame chair, where he had installed himself in order to play.
Now the figure to which M. de Charlus was applying, and with such
intensity, all his mental powers, and which was not, truth to tell,
among those customarily studied _more geometrico_,⁵⁶ was that proposed
to him by the lineaments of the young Marquis de Surgis’s face; it
seemed to be, so profound was M. de Charlus’s absorption before it, some
heraldic motto, some conundrum, some problem in algebra, the riddle or
formula of which he was seeking to penetrate or reveal. In front of him,
the sybilline signs and figures inscribed on this Table of the Law
seemed to be the grimoire that would enable the old wizard to learn the
direction in which the young man’s destinies were oriented. All of a
sudden, he saw that I was looking at him, raised his head as if emerging
from a dream and smiled at me, blushing. At that moment, Mme de Surgis’s
other son came up to the one who was playing, to look at his cards. Once
M. de Charlus had learned from me that they were brothers, his face
could not disguise the admiration inspired in him by a family capable of
creating such splendid yet such different masterpieces. And what would
have added to the Baron’s enthusiasm would have been to learn that the
two sons of Mme Surgis-le-Duc had not only the same mother but the same
father. The children of Jupiter are unalike, but that comes from the
fact that he married first of all Metis, part of whose destiny it was to
bring wise children into the world, then Themis, and next Eurynome, and
Mnemosyne, and Leto, and Juno only last of all. But by the one father,
Mme de Surgis had given birth to two sons who had each received beauties
from her, but different beauties.

At last I had the pleasure of Swann’s entry into the room, which was
very large, so that he did not notice me straight away. A pleasure mixed
with sadness, a sadness that the other guests perhaps did not feel, but
which with them consisted in the sort of fascination exerted by the
singular and unexpected forms of an imminent death, a death that is
already, as the common people would put it, written on the face. And it
was with an almost disobliging stupefaction, into which there entered a
tactless curiosity, cruelty and an at once calm yet concerned moment of
self-awareness (a mixture at once of _suave mari magno_ and _memento
quia pulvis_,⁵⁷ Robert would have said), that every gaze became fixed on
that face whose cheeks had been so eroded by disease, like a waning
moon, that, except from a certain angle, that no doubt from which Swann
looked at himself, they stopped short, like an insubstantial stage-set
to which an optical illusion alone can lend an appearance of depth.
Whether because of the absence of the cheeks that were no longer there
to diminish it, or whether arteriosclerosis, which is also a form of
intoxication, had reddened it just as drink would have done, or deformed
it, as morphine would have done, Swann’s Punchinello nose, for so long
reabsorbed into a pleasing face, now seemed enormous, tumid, crimson,
more that of an old Hebrew than an inquisitive Valois.⁵⁸ Perhaps in any
case, in recent days, the race had caused the physical type
characteristic of it to reappear more pronouncedly in him, at the same
time as a sense of moral solidarity with the other Jews, a solidarity
that Swann seemed to have neglected throughout his life, but which the
grafting, one on to the other, of a mortal illness, the Dreyfus Affair
and anti-Semitic propaganda, had reawakened. There are certain
Israelites, very shrewd and refined men of the world though they be, in
whom a boor and a prophet remain in reserve, or in the wings, so as to
make their entrance at a given moment in their lives, as in a play.
Swann had arrived at the age of the prophet. Certainly, with this face
from which, under the effect of his illness, whole segments had
disappeared, as from a block of ice that is melting and from which
entire slabs have fallen away, he was much changed. But I could not help
but be struck by how much more he had changed in relation to myself. I
could not manage to understand how I had been able once to inseminate
this excellent, cultivated man, whom I was very far from being bored at
meeting, with a mystery such that his appearance in the Champs-Elysées
caused my heart to pound, to the point where I was ashamed to approach
his silk-lined Inverness cape, and that at the door of the apartment
where such a being lived, I could not ring without being seized by
endless agitation and alarm; all this had vanished, not only from his
home but from his person, and the thought of talking with him might or
might not have been agreeable to me, but it had no effect whatsoever on
my nervous system.

How he had changed, moreover, since that same afternoon, when I had come
across him – only a few hours before after all – in the Duc de
Guermantes’s study! Had he really had an altercation with the Prince,
which had shaken him up? The supposition was not necessary. The least
effort that is demanded of someone who is very ill quickly becomes for
him an excessive strain. Already tired, he need only be exposed to the
heat of a soirée for his face to become distorted and to turn blue, as
an overripe pear may in less than a day, or milk that is on the turn.
Moreover, Swann’s hair had thinned in places and, as Mme de Guermantes
said, was in need of a furrier, it looked camphorated, and badly
camphorated. I was about to cross the smoking-room to talk to Swann
when, unfortunately, a hand came down on my shoulder: ‘Hello, _mon
petit_, I’m in Paris for forty-eight hours. I came round, I was told you
were here, so it’s to you my aunt owes the honour of my presence at her
party.’ It was Saint-Loup. I told him how beautiful I found the house.
‘Yes, very much the historical monument. But I find it dreary myself.
Don’t let’s get too close to my uncle Palamède, otherwise we’ll be
snapped up. As Mme Molé (for it’s she who rules the roost at present)
has just left, he’s all at sea. It seems it was a real spectacle, he
never strayed from her side, and only left her once he’d had her put
into her carriage. I don’t hold it against my uncle, only I find it
comic that my family council, which has always come down so hard on me,
should be made up of those very family members who’ve lived it up the
most, starting with the most dissipated of the lot, my uncle Charlus,
who’s my surrogate tutor, who’s had as many women as Don Juan, and who
even at his age doesn’t let up. There was a question at one time of my
being made a ward of court. I imagine that when all those old lechers
got together to consider the matter and sent for me to preach me a
sermon and tell me I was causing distress to my mother, they can’t have
been able to look each other in the eye without laughing. Inspect the
make-up of the council, they look to have deliberately picked the ones
who’ve had their hands up the most skirts.’ Leaving aside M. de Charlus,
on the subject of whom my friend’s surprise no longer seemed to me
justified, but for other reasons, and ones which were as it happens to
be modified later on in my mind, Robert was quite wrong to find it
extraordinary that lessons in good behaviour should be given to a young
man by family members who have led wild lives, or are still doing so.

Were atavism and family resemblances alone to be involved, it is
inevitable that the uncle who issues the reprimand should have more or
less the same failings as the nephew he has been charged with berating.
This is not the uncle being hypocritical, however, deceived as he is by
the capacity men possess for believing that each fresh set of
circumstances means that ‘things are different’, a capacity that enables
them to adopt artistic, political etc. errors without noticing that
these are the very errors that they took to be truths ten years ago,
apropos of another school of painting that they condemned, or another
political affair that they thought merited their hatred, but which they
have got over, and now espouse without recognizing them in their new
disguise. Moreover, even if the uncle’s faults are different from those
of the nephew, heredity may still to a certain extent be the causal law,
for the effect does not always resemble its cause, as a copy its
original, and, even if the uncle’s faults are worse, he may perfectly
well believe them to be less serious.

When M. de Charlus had just been remonstrating indignantly with Robert,
who anyway knew nothing of his uncle’s true tastes in those days, and
even if it had still been in the days when the Baron was denouncing his
own tastes, he may perfectly well have been sincere in considering, from
the point of view of a man of the world, that Robert was infinitely more
blameworthy than himself. Had Robert not got himself all but ostracized
from his society at the time when his uncle had been charged with making
him see reason? Had he not come close to being blackballed at the Jockey
Club? Was he not an object of ridicule for the sums he was lavishing on
a woman of the lowest kind, for his friendships with people, authors,
actors, Jews, not one of whom was a member of society, for his opinions,
which were no different from those of traitors, for the pain he was
causing to his whole family? How could this scandalous existence stand
comparison with that of M. de Charlus, who had been able, up until now,
not only to preserve but even to enhance his position as a Guermantes,
being an absolutely privileged individual in society, sought after,
adulated in the most select circles, and who, married to a Bourbon
princess,⁵⁹ an eminent woman, had been able to make her happy, had
devoted a cult to her memory that was more fervent and more exact than
is customary in society, and had thus been as good a husband as he had
been a son?

‘But are you sure M. de Charlus has had so many mistresses?’ I asked,
certainly not with the diabolical intention of revealing to Robert the
secret I had chanced upon, but irritated nonetheless by hearing him
maintain an error with so much certainty and self-satisfaction. He
merely shrugged in response to what he thought to be naïvety on my part.
‘In any case, I’m not blaming him for it, I consider he’s absolutely
right.’ And he began outlining a theory to me that would have horrified
him at Balbec (where he had not been content merely to denounce
seducers, death seeming to him the one punishment proportionate to the
crime). But then he had been still in love, and jealous. He went so far
as to sing the praises of houses of ill repute. ‘It’s only there you can
find a shoe that fits, what in the regiment we call your own size.’ He
no longer felt the disgust for places of this sort that had excited him
in Balbec when I alluded to them, and hearing him now, I told him that
Bloch had introduced me to them, but Robert answered that the one to
which Bloch went must have been ‘exceedingly run-down, the poor man’s
paradise.’ ‘It depends, after all: where was it?’ I avoided giving any
details, for I remembered that it was there, in fact, that the Rachel
with whom Robert had been so much in love used to give herself for one
_louis_.⁶⁰ ‘Anyway, I’ll introduce you to far better ones, where some
stunning women go.’ Hearing me express the desire that he should take me
as soon as possible to the ones he knew of, which had indeed to be much
superior to the establishment that Bloch had pointed out to me, he
evinced genuine regret at not being able to do so on this occasion as he
was leaving again the following day. ‘The next time I come, he said.
You’ll see, there are even young girls, he added with an air of mystery.
There’s a young Mademoiselle de…, d’Orgeville I believe, I’ll tell you
precisely, who’s the daughter of people right out of the top drawer; the
mother was born more or less a La Croix-l’Evêque, they’re from the cream
of society, some sort of relation, if I’m not mistaken, of my aunt
Oriane’s. Anyway, you’ve only to set eyes on the child to tell she’s the
daughter of people of substance (for a moment I was aware of the shadow
of the Guermantes genius spreading itself over Robert’s voice, which
passed like a cloud, but at a great height, and did not pause). She
looks to me like a marvellous prospect. The parents are always ill and
can’t look after her. The child is looking to amuse herself, believe me,
and I rely on you to find distractions for her! – Oh, when will you be
back? – I don’t know; if you’re not absolutely set on duchesses (that
title being the only one that for the aristocracy denotes a peculiarly
brilliant rank, just as among the lower orders they would say the same
about princesses), in another line of country there’s Mme Putbus’s head
lady’s-maid.’

At that moment, Mme de Surgis entered the card-room to look for her
sons. On noticing her, M. de Charlus went up to her with an affability
by which the Marquise was all the more agreeably surprised for having
expected great coldness from the Baron, he having always posed as
Oriane’s protector and, alone of the family – all too often indulgent of
the Duc’s whims because of his inheritance and out of jealousy with
regard to the Duchesse – been merciless in keeping his brother’s
mistresses at arm’s length. Thus Mme de Surgis might have well
understood the motives of the attitude she feared in the Baron, but was
far from suspecting those of the quite contrary welcome that she
received from him. He spoke to her admiringly of the portrait that
Jacquet⁶¹ had made of her in the old days. This admiration grew even
into an excitement which, if it was partly self-interested, in order to
prevent the Marquise from moving away, to ‘grapple’ her, as Robert used
to say of hostile armies whose fighting strength one wants to keep
pinned down, may also have been sincere. For if everyone was pleased to
admire in her sons Mme de Surgis’s own queenly bearing and her eyes, the
Baron was able to experience an inverse but equally keen pleasure in
discovering these attractions converging once again in the mother, as in
a portrait which does not itself kindle desires in us but nourishes
those that it awakens with the aesthetic admiration that it inspires.
These desires came retrospectively to lend a voluptuous charm to
Jacquet’s portrait itself, and at that moment the Baron would gladly
have acquired it in order to study there the physiological genealogy of
the two young Surgis. ‘You can see I wasn’t exaggerating, Robert said to
me. Just look how attentive my uncle’s being to Mme de Surgis. Yet even
there, it surprises me. If Oriane knew, she’d be furious. Frankly, there
are enough women without going and throwing yourself at that particular
one,’ he added; like all the people who are not in love, he imagined
that we choose the person we love after endless deliberation and after
taking account of various qualities and kinds of suitability. What was
more, while being mistaken about his uncle, whom he thought was addicted
to women, Robert, in his resentment, spoke of M. de Charlus too lightly.
One is not always someone’s nephew with impunity. It is very often by
their intermediation that a hereditary habit is sooner or later handed
down. A whole portrait gallery might be formed in this way, under the
title of the German comedy, _Uncle and Nephew_,⁶² in which the uncle
would be seen watching to make sure, jealously if unwittingly, that his
nephew ends up resembling him. I shall even add that this gallery would
be incomplete if it were not made to include the uncles who are not bona
fide relations, being only the uncles of the nephew’s wife. The M. de
Charluses of this world are so convinced indeed of being the only good
husbands, the only ones what is more of whom a wife is not jealous, that
generally speaking, out of affection for their niece, they make her,
too, marry a Charlus. Which ravels the skein of family likenesses. And
to affection for the niece is sometimes conjoined an affection for her
fiancé, too. Such marriages are not uncommon, and are often what is
called happy.

‘What were we talking about? Oh, about that tall blonde, Mme Putbus’s
lady’s-maid. She likes women, too, but I fancy you don’t mind that; I
can tell you honestly, I’ve never seen so lovely a creature. – I see her
as somewhat Giorgione-like?⁶³ – Pure Giorgione! Oh, if only I had time
to spend in Paris, what splendid things there are to do! And then, you
move on to the next. Because love, that’s just a joke, you know, I’m
well and truly over all that.’ I soon found, to my surprise, that he was
no less over literature, too, whereas it was only with the
_littérateurs_ that he had seemed to be disenchanted at our last meeting
(‘They’re nearly all of them thoroughly bad lots,’ he had told me),
which could have been explained by his justified resentment against
certain of Rachel’s friends. They, indeed, had convinced her that she
would never have any talent if she allowed Robert, ‘a man of another
race’, to acquire influence over her, and, along with her, they made fun
of him, to his face, at the dinner-parties he gave for them. But in
actual fact, Robert’s love of Letters had not gone very deep, it did not
emanate from his true nature, it was only a by-product of his love for
Rachel, and had been erased along with it, at the same time as his
abhorrence of voluptuaries and his religious respect for women’s virtue.

‘What a strange look those two young men have! See, Marquise, that
curious passion for cards, Marquise,’ said M. de Charlus, pointing her
two sons out to Mme de Surgis, as if he had absolutely no idea who they
were. ‘They must be two Orientals, they have certain characteristic
features, perhaps they’re Turks,’ he added, at once to further establish
his feigned innocence and to attest to a vague antipathy which, when
next it gave way to affability, would prove that this last was addressed
purely to their status as sons of Mme de Surgis, having begun only when
the Baron had learned who they were. Perhaps also M. de Charlus, whose
insolence was a gift of nature that he took delight in exercising, was
taking advantage of the short time during which he was supposed not to
know who these young men were to amuse himself at the expense of Mme de
Surgis and to indulge in his customary raillery, just as Scapin turns
his master’s being in disguise to profit by laying vigorously about him
with a stick.⁶⁴

‘They’re my sons,’ said Mme de Surgis, going red, as she would not have
done had she been subtler without being any more virtuous. She would
then have understood that the expression of absolute indifference or
raillery that M. de Charlus was exhibiting towards a young man wasn’t
sincere any more than the wholly superficial admiration that he evinced
for a woman expressed the true depths of his nature. The woman to whom
he might have gone on indefinitely making the most complimentary remarks
might have been jealous of the look which, even as he talked to her, he
was casting at a man whom he then pretended not to have remarked. For
that particular look was a look different from those which M. de Charlus
had for women; a particular look that rose from the depths, and which,
even at a soirée, ingenuously, he could not prevent himself casting at
young men, like the glances of a couturier, which betray his profession
by the way they have of at once fastening on to the clothes.

‘Oh, how strange!’ replied M. de Charlus, not without insolence, while
seeming to make his thoughts travel a long way to bring them back to a
reality very different from that which he had pretended to assume. ‘But
I don’t know them,’ he added, afraid of having gone a little too far in
expressing antipathy and of having thereby paralysed in the Marquise her
intention of making them acquainted to him. ‘Would you like to allow me
to introduce them to you?’ asked Mme de Surgis diffidently. – But, good
Lord, whatever you think, I’m very willing, I’m not so very entertaining
a personage perhaps for such young men,’ intoned M. de Charlus, with the
air of hesitation and coldness of someone allowing a politeness to be
wrested from him. ‘Arnulphe, Victurnien, come quickly,’ said Mme de
Surgis. Victurnien stood up unhesitatingly. Arnulphe, without seeing
further than his brother, followed him submissively.

‘It’s the sons’ turn now, then, Robert said to me. What a scream. Right
down to the household dog, he strives to please.⁶⁵ It’s all the more
comic in that my uncle detests gigolos. And see how earnestly he’s
listening to them. If it’d been me who wanted to introduce them to him,
he’d have soon sent me packing. Listen, I’m going to have to go and say
hello to Oriane. I’ve so little time to spend in Paris that I want to
try to see everyone here that otherwise I’d have to leave cards with.’
‘How well brought up they seem, and what pretty manners they have, M. de
Charlus was in the midst of saying. – You think so?’ replied Mme de
Surgis, enraptured.

Swann, having caught sight of me, came up to Saint-Loup and me. With
Swann, a Jewish cheerfulness was less discriminating than the
pleasantries of the man of the world. ‘Good evening, he said to us. Good
Lord! All three of us together, they’re going to think it’s a meeting of
the Syndicate. In a minute they’ll be looking to see where the cashbox
is!’ He had not noticed that M. de Beaucerfeuil was behind him and could
hear him. The General gave an involuntary frown. We could hear the voice
of M. de Charlus close beside us: ‘What, your name’s Victurnien, like in
the _Cabinet des Antiques_?’⁶⁶ said the Baron in order to prolong the
conversation with the two young men. ‘By Balzac, yes,’ answered the
elder of the Surgis, who had never read a single line of that novelist,
but whose form master had pointed out to him, a few days before, the
similarity between his first name and that of d’Esgrignon. Mme de Surgis
was overjoyed to see her son excelling himself and M. de Charlus in
ecstasies at meeting with so much knowledge.

‘It seems Loubet⁶⁷ is entirely for us, from an altogether reliable
source,’ Swann said to Saint-Loup, but this time dropping his voice so
as not to be overheard by the General, his wife’s Republican connections
having become more advantageous to him since the Dreyfus Affair had been
at the centre of his concerns. ‘I’m telling you this because I know
you’re with us all the way.’

‘No, not that far; you’re completely mistaken, answered Robert. The
whole affair began badly and I very much regret sticking my nose in. It
had nothing to do with me. If I could start again, I’d keep well out of
the way. I’m a soldier and for the Army above all. If you remain for a
minute with M. Swann, I’ll find you again in a little while, I’m going
over to my aunt.’ But I could see that it was with Mlle d’Ambresac that
he was going to talk and I was chagrined to think that he had lied to me
about their possible engagement. I felt easier in my mind when I learned
that he had been introduced to her half an hour before by Mme de
Marsantes, who wanted the marriage, the Ambresacs being very wealthy.

‘At last, said M. de Charlus to Mme de Surgis, I find a young man of
education, who has read, who knows who Balzac is. And it gives me all
the more pleasure to meet him here, where it’s become such a rarity, in
the house of one of my peers, one of us,’ he added, laying stress on
these words. In vain did the Guermantes make a pretence of finding all
men equal, on the great occasions when they found themselves with people
who were ‘well-born’, and especially less ‘well-born’, whom they desired
and were able to flatter, they did not hesitate to bring out old family
memories. ‘In the old days, the Baron went on, aristocrats meant the
best, in intelligence, and in feeling. Yet here’s the first one amongst
us that I find knows who Victurnien d’Esgrignon is. I’m wrong to say the
first. There’s also a Polignac and a Montesquiou,⁶⁸ added M. de Charlus,
knowing that this double assimilation could but go to the Marquise’s
head. Your sons, moreover, have someone to take after, their maternal
grandfather had a celebrated eighteenth-century collection. I will show
you my own if you’ll do me the pleasure of coming to have lunch one day,
he said to the young Victurnien. I’ll show you a curious edition of the
_Cabinet des Antiques_ with corrections in Balzac’s own hand. I shall be
charmed to bring the two Victurniens face to face.’

I could not make up my mind to leave Swann. He had arrived at that
degree of fatigue in which the body of a sick man is no more than a
retort in which chemical reactions are to be observed. His face was
marked with small specks of Prussian blue, which appeared not to belong
to the world of the living, and gave off that kind of smell which, at
school, after ‘experiments’, makes it so unpleasant to remain in a
‘Science’ classroom. I asked him whether he had not had a long
conversation with the Prince de Guermantes and whether he did not want
to recount to me what form it had taken. ‘Yes, indeed, he said, but
first go for a moment with M. de Charlus and Mme de Surgis, I’ll wait
for you here.’

In fact, M. de Charlus having suggested to Mme de Surgis leaving this
overheated room and going to sit for a minute with her in another, had
not asked her two sons to go with their mother, but me. In this way, he
made it seem, having baited his hook, that he did not care about the two
young men. He was, moreover, paying me a cheap compliment, Mme de
Surgis-le-Duc being somewhat disapproved of.

Unfortunately, scarcely were we seated in a bay without any exit before
Mme de Saint-Euverte, the target of the Baron’s jibes, chanced to come
by. She, in order perhaps to dissemble, or to disregard openly the
hostile feelings she inspired in M. de Charlus, but above all to show
she was on intimate terms with a lady who was talking so familiarly with
him, wished the celebrated beauty a disdainfully amicable good day, who
replied to it, while glancing at M. de Charlus out of the corner of her
eye, with a mocking smile. But so constricted was the bay that when Mme
de Saint-Euverte wanted, behind us, to continue flushing out her next
day’s guests, she found herself trapped and unable easily to disengage
herself, a precious moment which M. de Charlus, anxious to show off his
insolent verve to the watching mother of the two young men, took good
care not to waste. An inane question that I put to him, without malice,
furnished him with the opportunity for a triumphal diatribe of which the
wretched Saint-Euverte, almost immobilized behind us, could hardly have
lost a single word. ‘Would you believe that this impertinent young man,
he said, indicating me to Mme de Surgis, has just asked me, with none of
the care one ought to take to hide these sorts of needs, whether I was
going to Mme de Saint-Euverte’s, that is, I fancy, whether I had the
colic.⁶⁹ I should attempt in any case to relieve myself in some more
comfortable spot than at the house of someone who, if memory serves, was
celebrating her centenary when I was making my entry into society, i.e.
not _chez elle_. Yet who would be more interesting to listen to than
her? So many historical memories, seen or lived through, from the days
of the First Empire and the Restoration,⁷⁰ so many intimate stories,
too, with nothing “Saint-ly” about them for sure but that must have been
very “_vertes_”,⁷¹ to judge by how she still frisks about on those
venerable hams! What would stop me from interrogating her about those
exciting times is the sensitivity of my olfactory apparatus. Mere
proximity to the lady is enough. I suddenly say to myself: “Oh, good
God, someone’s burst my cesspit,” but it’s simply that the Marquise,
with the aim of getting some invitation, has just opened her mouth. And
you’ll understand that were I to have the misfortune to go to her, the
cesspit would be multiplied into a fearsome barrelful of sewage. Yet she
bears a mystical name that always makes me think jubilantly, though she
has long since passed the date of her own jubilee, of that stupid line
of so-called “deliquescent” poetry: “_Ah! Verte, combien verte était mon
âme ce jour-là_…”⁷² But I need more wholesome greenery. I’m told that
this indefatigable old street-walker gives “_garden-parties_”, myself,
I’d call them “invitations to a stroll in the sewers”. Are you going to
filthy yourself there?’ he asked Mme de Surgis, who this time found
herself in difficulties. For, wishing to pretend to the Baron that she
wasn’t going yet knowing that she would give days of her life rather
than miss the Saint-Euverte matinée, she got out of it by a compromise,
by uncertainty that is. This uncertainty took so stupidly dilettantish,
and so miserably wardrobe-minded a form, that M. de Charlus, unafraid of
giving offence to Mme de Surgis, whom he was on the other hand anxious
to please, started to laugh to show her that ‘it didn’t wash’ with him.

‘I always admire the people who make plans, she said; I often cancel at
the last minute. There’s the question of a summer gown that may alter
things. I shall act on the inspiration of the moment.’

For my own part, I was indignant at the abominable short speech that M.
de Charlus had just delivered. I would have liked to shower the giver of
_garden-parties_ with good things. In society, alas, as in the world of
politics, the victims are so cowardly that you can not hold it against
their executioners for long. Mme de Saint-Euverte, who had managed to
extricate herself from the bay the entrance to which we had been
obstructing, brushed unintentionally against the Baron in passing and,
in a reflex of snobbery that annihilated all the anger in her, perhaps
even in hopes of an overture of a kind at which this cannot have been
her first attempt, exclaimed: ‘Oh, forgive me, Monsieur de Charlus, I
hope I didn’t hurt you,’ as if she were kneeling before her lord and
master. The latter did not deign to reply other than by a bold, ironic
laugh and granted her only a ‘good evening’ which, as if he had only
become aware of the Marquise’s presence once she had been the first to
greet him, was one insult the more. At last, with a supreme
obsequiousness which made me bleed for her, Mme de Saint-Euverte came up
to me, and, after taking me aside, said into my ear: ‘But how have I
offended M. de Charlus? They claim he doesn’t consider me smart enough
for him,’ she said, laughing uproariously. I remained serious. For one
thing, I found it stupid that she should appear to think or to want it
thought that no one was in actual fact as smart as she was. And for
another thing, people who laugh so loudly at what they say, when it is
not funny, thereby excuse us from joining in by taking all the hilarity
on themselves.

‘Others assure me that he’s put out I don’t invite him. But he doesn’t
give me much encouragement. He looks to be avoiding me (the expression
struck me as feeble). Try to find out and come and tell me tomorrow. And
if he feels remorse and wants to come with you, bring him. Mercy for all
sinners. It would even quite please me, on account of Mme de Surgis,
whom it’d annoy. I give you carte blanche. You’ve got the most
discerning flair for all that sort of thing and I don’t want to seem to
be angling for guests. At all events, on you, I count absolutely.’

I reflected that Swann must be getting tired of waiting for me. I did
not want, moreover, to be too late returning home because of Albertine,
and taking leave of Mme de Surgis and M. de Charlus, I went to find my
invalid again in the card-room. I asked him whether what he had said to
the Prince during their conversation in the garden was indeed what M. de
Bréauté (whom I did not name) had retailed to us and which had to do
with a playlet by Bergotte. He burst out laughing: ‘There’s not a word
of truth in it, not one, it’s a complete invention and would have been
totally stupid. Really, it’s unbelievable, this spontaneous generation
of error. I shan’t ask you who told you that, but it would be really
intriguing, in a setting as confined as this, to go back step by step
and find out how it took shape. Moreover, how can what the Prince said
to me be of any interest to anyone? People are very inquisitive. I’ve
never been inquisitive myself, except when I’ve been in love and when I
was jealous. And for all that that taught me! Are you jealous?’ I told
Swann that I had never felt jealousy, that I did not even know what it
was. ‘Well, I congratulate you! When you’re a little bit jealous, it’s
not altogether unpleasant, from two points of view. For one thing,
because it enables people who are not inquisitive to interest themselves
in the lives of other people, or at least of one other person. And then,
because it gives you quite a good sense of the sweetness of possession,
of getting into a carriage with a woman, of not letting her go off
alone. But that’s only in the very early stages of the disease or when
the cure is almost complete. In between, it’s the most frightful of
tortures. Moreover, I have to say that I’ve seldom experienced even the
two forms of sweetness I’m referring to; the first by the fault of my
nature, which is incapable of any very prolonged reflection; the second
because of circumstances, by the fault of the woman, I mean of the
women, of whom I’ve been jealous. But that doesn’t matter. Even when you
no longer care about things, it still means something that you did so
once, because it was always for reasons that escaped other people. We
feel that the memory of those feelings is only in us; it’s into
ourselves we must return in order to look at it. Don’t make too much fun
of the idealist jargon, but what I mean is that I’ve loved life and have
loved the arts. Well, now that I’m a bit too tired to live with other
people, these old feelings that I’ve had, so personal to myself, seem
very precious to me, which is the obsession of every collector. I open
up my heart to myself like a sort of showcase, and I look one by one at
so many loves that other people won’t have known. And, about this
collection, to which I’m now even more attached than to other people, I
tell myself, a little like Mazarin with his books,⁷³ but without any
anguish as it happens, that it will be very tiresome to leave it all
behind. But let’s get on to my conversation with the Prince, I’m only
going to tell one person about it, and that person shall be you.’ My
hearing him was made harder by the conversation that, right beside us,
M. de Charlus, who had returned to the card-room, was prolonging
indefinitely. ‘And do you read, too? What do you do?’ he asked the Comte
Arnulphe, who did not know even the name of Balzac. But his
short-sightedness, because he saw everything very small, made him appear
to be seeing from a long way off, so that, a rare touch of poetry in a
statuesque Greek god, remote and mysterious stars were as if inscribed
in his pupils.

‘Suppose we take a short turn in the garden, Monsieur,’ I said to Swann,
while the Comte Arnulphe, in a lisping voice that seemed to indicate
that his mental development at least was incomplete, answered M. de
Charlus with an artless and obliging precision: ‘Oh, with me it’s more
golf, tennis, football, running, polo especially.’ Just so, having
subdivided herself, did Minerva, in a certain city, cease from being the
goddess of Wisdom and incarnate one part of herself in a purely
sporting, hippic divinity, ‘Athena Hippia’. He also went to Saint-Moritz
to ski, for Pallas Tritogeneia frequents the high peaks and outruns
horsemen.⁷⁴ ‘Ah!’ replied M. de Charlus, with the transcendent smile of
the intellectual who does not even take the trouble to hide that he is
making fun, but who anyway feels so superior to other people, and so
despises the intelligence of those who are the least stupid, that he
hardly differentiates between them and those who are the most stupid, as
soon as they can be agreeable to him in some other fashion. By the mere
act of talking to Arnulphe, M. de Charlus considered that he was
conferring on him a superiority that the whole world must envy and
acknowledge. ‘No, Swann replied, I’m too tired to walk, let’s rather sit
down in some corner, I can’t stand any longer.’ This was true, yet
starting to talk had already given him back a certain animation. The
fact is that, even in the most genuine fatigue, especially among the
nervous, there is an element that depends on our awareness and is
preserved only by the memory. We are suddenly weary the moment that we
fear being so, and to overcome our fatigue it is enough to forget it.
True, Swann was not quite one of those exhausted indefatigables who,
having arrived drained, wilting, ready to drop, revive in conversation
like a flower in water and can, for hours on end, draw, from their own
words, a strength that they cannot, alas, transmit to those who are
listening to them, who appear more and more dejected the more wide awake
the speaker feels. But Swann belonged to that strong Jewish race, in
whose vital energy and resistance to death its individuals themselves
seem to share. Struck down by their particular illness, as it itself has
been by persecution, they each struggle indefinitely in a terrible death
agony that may be prolonged beyond any probable term, when all that can
now be seen is a prophet’s beard crowned by an immense nose, dilated in
order to draw the final breaths, before the time comes for the ritual
prayers and the punctual file-past to begin, of distant relatives,
moving mechanically forward, as on an Assyrian frieze.

We went to sit down, but before moving away from the group formed by M.
de Charlus, the two young Surgis and their mother, Swann could not help
fixing the latter’s corsage with the lengthy, dilated, lustful glances
of a connoisseur. He put in his monocle so as to have a better view and,
even as he was talking to me, he would now and again cast a glance in
that lady’s direction. ‘Here, word for word, is my conversation with the
Prince, he said to me once we were seated, and if you recall what I told
you just now, you’ll see why I have chosen you as a confidant. And then
for another reason, too, as you’ll find out one day. “My dear Swann, the
Prince de Guermantes said to me, you’ll forgive me if I’ve seemed to be
avoiding you for some little time. (I’d noticed nothing of the kind,
being ill and myself avoiding company.) In the first place, I’d heard,
and could indeed foresee, that you held, in this unfortunate affair that
is dividing the country, opinions wholly opposed to my own. Now it would
have been pained me exceedingly had you professed them in my presence.
So great was my nervousness that, the Princesse having heard her
brother-in-law, the Grand-Duke of Hesse,⁷⁵ say two years ago that
Dreyfus was innocent, she didn’t simply pick up on the remark very
promptly, she didn’t repeat it so as not to annoy me. At almost the same
time, the Swedish Crown Prince⁷⁶ had come to Paris and, having probably
heard that the Empress Eugénie was a Dreyfusiste,⁷⁷ got her confused
with the Princesse (an odd confusion, you’ll admit, between a woman of
my wife’s rank and a Spaniard, far less well born than they say and
married to a mere Bonaparte) and said to her: “Princesse, I’m doubly
glad to meet you, because I know you have the same ideas as I do about
the Dreyfus Affair, which doesn’t surprise me since your Highness is
from Bavaria.” Which earned the Prince this reply: “Monseigneur, I’m
nothing more than a French princess, and I think as all my compatriots
do.” Now, my dear Swann, about a year and a half ago, a conversation I
had with General de Beaucerfeuil gave me to suspect that, not an error,
but grave illegalities had been committed in the conduct of the
trial.” ’
We were interrupted (Swann was anxious that his account should not be
overheard) by the voice of M. de Charlus, who (without concerning
himself with us) was on his way past, escorting Mme de Surgis out, and
stopped in order to try and detain her further, either on account of her
sons, or from that desire which the Guermantes had not to see the
present moment brought to an end, which plunged them into a sort of
anxious inertia. In which connection, Swann told me something a little
later on that removed from the name of Surgis-le-Duc all the poetry I
had been finding in it. The Marquise de Surgis-le-Duc had a far higher
place in society, and far better connections by marriage, than her
cousin, the Comte de Surgis, who was poor and lived on his estates. But
the word that ended the title, ‘le Duc’, was far from having the origin
I had been lending to it, which had led me to compare it, in my
imagination, to Bourg l’Abbé, Bois-le-Roi and the like.⁷⁸ Quite simply,
during the Restoration, a Comte de Surgis had married the daughter of an
extremely wealthy industrialist, M. Leduc, or Le Duc, himself the son of
a manufacturer of chemical products, the wealthiest man of his day, and
who was a peer of France.⁷⁹ For the male issue of this marriage, King
Charles X had created the marquisate of Surgis-le-Duc, the marquisate of
Surgis existing already in the family. The addition of the bourgeois
name had not prevented this branch, on account of its enormous fortune,
from marrying into the first families of the realm. And the present
Marquise de Surgis-le-Duc, with her high birth, might have had a
position of the first rank. A demon of perversity had driven her,
despising a ready-made position, to flee the conjugal home, and to live
in the most scandalous fashion. Then, the world she had despised as a
twenty-year-old, when it was at her feet, failed her cruelly at thirty,
when, for the last ten years, no one, bar a few faithful woman friends,
any longer acknowledged her, and she had undertaken painstakingly to
reconquer, bit by bit, what she had possessed at her birth (a not
uncommon return journey).

As for the great noblemen, her kinsfolk, disowned of old by her and who
had disowned her in their turn, she excused herself for the delight she
would take in getting them back by the childhood memories she would be
able to evoke with them. In saying which, in order to disguise her
snobbery, she was perhaps being less untruthful than she thought.
‘Basin, it’s my whole youth!’ she said on the day when he returned to
her. And indeed, there was some truth in this. But she had miscalculated
in choosing him for a lover. For all the Duchesse de Guermantes’s woman
friends would be taking her side, and Mme de Surgis would thus descend
for a second time the slope she had had so much difficulty in
reascending. ‘Well,’ M. de Charlus was in the midst of saying to her,
anxious to keep the conversation going, ‘you must lay my tribute at the
feet of the beautiful portrait. How is it? What’s become of it? – But
you know, I no longer have it, replied Mme de Surgis, my husband wasn’t
happy with it. – Not happy! With one of the masterpieces of the age, the
equal of Nattier’s Duchesse de Châteauroux⁸⁰ and which aspired,
moreover, to capture a goddess no less murderous and majestic! Oh, that
little blue collar! That’s to say, never did Vermeer paint a fabric with
greater mastery, let’s not say that too loudly so Swann doesn’t attack
us with the intention of avenging his favourite painter, the master of
Delft.’ The Marquise, turning round, addressed a smile and held out her
hand to Swann, who had risen to greet her. But, almost without
disguising it, the advancing years having perhaps deprived him, either
of the moral will, out of an indifference to public opinion, or else of
the physical capability, out of a heightening of desire and a weakening
of the mechanisms that help to conceal it, the moment Swann had, as he
shook the Marquise’s hand, seen her bosom from close to and from above,
he plunged an attentive, serious, absorbed, almost anxious, gaze into
the depths of her corsage, and his nostrils, intoxicated by the woman’s
perfume, quivered like a butterfly ready to go and settle on the
half-glimpsed flower. Abruptly, he tore himself free from the vertigo
that had gripped him, and, so contagious at times is desire, Mme de
Surgis herself, though embarrassed, suppressed a deep sigh. ‘The painter
was put out, she said to M. de Charlus, and took it back. People have
said it’s now at Diane de Saint-Euverte’s. – I shall never believe,
answered the Baron, that a masterpiece could have such poor taste.’

‘He’s talking to her about her portrait. _I_ could talk to her about
that portrait as well as Charlus, Swann said, affecting a drawling,
louche tone and following the retreating couple with his eyes. And it
would surely give me more pleasure than Charlus,’ he added. I asked him
whether what was said about M. de Charlus was true, in which I lied
twice over, for if I did not know whether anything had ever been said, I
knew very well on the other hand, from a little earlier, that what I had
meant was true. Swann shrugged, as if I had proffered an absurdity.
‘That’s to say he’s a delightful friend. But do I need to add that it’s
purely Platonic. He’s more sentimental than others, that’s all; on the
other hand, because he never goes very far with women, that’s given a
sort of credibility to the nonsensical rumours you want to talk about.
Charlus is very fond of his friends perhaps, but take my word for it,
that has never happened anywhere except in his head and in his heart.
Anyway, we’re perhaps going to get a couple of seconds’ peace and quiet.
So, the Prince de Guermantes went on: “I’ll admit to you that this
notion, of a possible illegality in the conduct of the trial, was
extremely painful to me because, as you know, of the reverence I have
for the Army; I raised it again with the General, and I no longer had
any doubts on that score, alas! I shall tell you frankly that the idea
that in all this an innocent man might have suffered the most
ignominious of punishments had never even crossed my mind. But,
tormented by this idea of illegality, I set to studying what I had
refused to read, and that was when I became haunted by doubts, not just
about the illegality this time but about his innocence. I didn’t think I
should mention it to the Princesse. God knows she’s become as French as
I am. After all, I’d made such a point, from the day I married her, of
showing her our France in all her beauty, and what for me is the most
splendid thing about her, her Army, that it was too cruel for me to let
her into my suspicions, which only affected, it’s true, a few officers.
But I’m from a family of soldiers, I refused to believe that officers
could be wrong. I raised it yet again with Beaucerfeuil, he confessed to
me that guilty machinations had been set on foot, that the bordereau
wasn’t perhaps by Dreyfus, but that there existed glaring proof of his
guilt. This was the Henry document.⁸¹ And a few days later, we learnt it
was a forgery. From then on, on the sly from the Princesse, I started
reading _Le Siècle_ and _L’Aurore_⁸² every day; soon I was no longer in
any doubt, I could no longer sleep. I unburdened myself of my moral
sufferings to our friend, the Abbé Poiré, whom I was astonished to find
had the same conviction, and I had Masses said by him for Dreyfus, for
his unfortunate wife and his children. At which juncture, one morning
when I went in to the Princesse, I saw her lady’s-maid hiding something
she’d had in her hand. I laughed and asked her what it was, she went red
and wouldn’t tell me. I had the utmost confidence in my wife, but this
incident greatly disturbed me (the Princesse, too, no doubt, her
lady’s-maid must have told her about it), because my dear Marie hardly
spoke to me during the lunch that followed. That was the day when I
asked the Abbé Poiré if he could say my Mass for Dreyfus the next day.”
Oh no!’ exclaimed Swann in a low voice, breaking off. I looked up and
saw the Duc de Guermantes coming towards us. ‘Forgive my disturbing you,
_mes enfants_. Young fellow, he said, addressing himself to me, I am
delegated to speak to you by Oriane. Marie and Gilbert have asked her to
stay and have supper at their table with five or six people only: the
Princesse de Hesse, Mme de Ligne, Mme de Tarente, Mme de Chevreuse and
the Duchesse d’Arenberg.⁸³ Unfortunately, we can’t stay, because we’re
going to a small costume ball of sorts.’ I was listening, but whenever
we have something to do at an appointed moment, we depute a certain
personage inside us accustomed to this sort of task to keep an eye on
the clock and give us due warning. This internal servant reminded me, as
I had asked him to a few hours earlier, that Albertine, at that moment
very far from my thoughts, was to come round straight after the theatre.
So I turned down the supper. It was not that I was not enjoying myself
at the Princesse de Guermantes’s. Men may thus have several sorts of
pleasures. The true pleasure is that for which they give up another. But
this last, if it is apparent, or is alone apparent even, may act as a
decoy for the first one, may reassure the jealous or throw them off the
scent, may lead the world astray. And yet, a little happiness or a
little suffering is all it takes for us to sacrifice it to the other
pleasure. Sometimes a third order of pleasures, more serious but more
essential, does not yet exist for us, whose virtuality betrays itself
only by arousing regrets or discouragement. It is to these pleasures,
however, that we shall give ourselves later on. To give an altogether
minor example, a soldier in time of peace will sacrifice his social life
to love, but once war is declared (and without there being any need even
to introduce the notion of a patriotic duty), love to the passion,
stronger than love, for fighting. For all that Swann had said he was
glad to be recounting his history to me, I felt strongly that, because
of the lateness of the hour, and because he was too unwell, his
conversation with me was one of those exertions for which those who know
that they are killing themselves by late nights, and by excess, feel an
exasperated regret on returning home, like that felt by prodigals at the
huge sums they have once again spent, yet who will be unable to prevent
themselves on the morrow from tossing money out of the window. Once past
a certain degree of weakness, whether it be caused by age or by
sickness, any pleasure indulged at the expense of sleep, outside our
habits, any disruption, becomes a worry. The talker continues to talk
out of politeness, or of excitement, but he knows that the hour when he
might still have been able to get to sleep has already passed, and
knows, too, the reproaches he will be directing at himself during the
insomnia and tiredness that will ensue. Already, moreover, even the
momentary pleasure has come to an end, mind and body are too drained of
their energies to welcome with pleasure what to your interlocutor seems
like a distraction. They resemble an apartment on a day of departure or
removal, when the visits we receive sitting on trunks, our eyes glued to
the clock, are such drudgery. ‘Alone at last, he said to me; I no longer
know where I’d got to. I told you, didn’t I, that the Prince had asked
the Abbé Poiré if he could have his Mass said for Dreyfus. “No,” was the
Abbé’s reply to me (I say _me_, Swann said, because it’s the Prince
talking to me, you understand?), “because I’ve another Mass I’ve been
instructed to say for him also this morning.” – What, I said to him,
there’s another Catholic besides myself who’s convinced of his
innocence? – So it would seem. – But this other supporter’s conviction
must be more recent than my own. – But this supporter was already making
me say Masses when you still thought Dreyfus to be guilty. – Oh, I can
tell it’s not someone from our circle. – On the contrary! – Really,
there are Dreyfusistes among us? You intrigue me; I’d like to unburden
myself to this _rara avis_, if I know them. – You do know them. – Their
name? – The Princesse de Guermantes.” While I had been afraid of
upsetting nationalist opinions, the French faith of my dear wife had
been afraid on the other hand of alarming my religious opinions, my
patriotic sentiments. But on her side, she’d been thinking as I had,
though for longer than me. And what her maid had been hiding on entering
her room, what she went out to buy her every day, was _L’Aurore_. There
and then, my dear Swann, I thought of the pleasure I’d give you by
telling you how closely akin my ideas on the matter were to your own;
forgive me for not having done so sooner. If you go back to the silence
I had maintained vis-à-vis the Princesse, you won’t be surprised that
being of the same mind as you should then have kept me away from you
even more than thinking differently from you. For I found the subject
infinitely painful to broach. The more I believe that an error, that
crimes even have been committed, the more I bleed in my love for the
Army. I’d have thought that opinions similar to mine were far from
filling you with the same sadness, when I was told the other day that
you had strongly condemned the insults to the Army and that the
Dreyfusistes should have agreed to ally themselves with the insulters.
That decided me, I’ll admit I found it cruel to confess to you what I
think of certain officers, few in number happily, but it’s a relief for
me not to have to keep my distance from you any longer and especially
that you should feel that, if my feelings may have been other, it was
because I was in no doubt at all as to the soundness of the verdict. As
soon as I felt any doubt, I could wish for only one thing, for the error
to be put right.” I confess to you that these words of the Prince de
Guermantes moved me profoundly. If you knew him as I do, if you knew
from where he had had to return to get to this point, you would feel
admiration for him, and he deserves it. Not that his opinion surprises
me, he’s so upright a character!’ Swann was forgetting that, that same
afternoon, he had said to me on the contrary that opinions in the
Dreyfus Affair were governed by atavism. At most, he had made an
exception for intelligence, since in Saint-Loup’s case it had succeeded
in getting the better of atavism and making him into a Dreyfusard. But
he had just found that this victory was of short duration and that
Saint-Loup had gone over to the enemy. So the role devolved a little
earlier on to intelligence was now given to uprightness of heart. In
point of fact, we always discover after the event that our adversaries
had a reason for taking the side they do take, and one that does not
depend on the degree to which that side is in the right, and that those
who think as we do have been constrained to do so by, if their moral
nature is too contemptible to be invoked, intelligence, and if they have
no great acumen, uprightness.

Swann now found those who were of his opinion to be uniformly
intelligent, his old friend the Prince de Guermantes and my
school-fellow Bloch, whom he had hitherto kept at arm’s length but whom
he invited to lunch. Swann interested Bloch greatly by telling him that
the Prince de Guermantes was a Dreyfusard. ‘We must ask him to sign our
lists for Picquart;⁸⁴ with a name like his, that would have a tremendous
effect.’ But Swann, tempering the burning conviction of the Israelite
with the diplomatic moderation of the man about town, whose habits he
had imbibed too deeply to be able this belatedly to shed them, refused
to sanction Bloch’s sending the Prince a round-robin to sign, even a
seemingly spontaneous one. ‘He can’t do that, one mustn’t ask for the
impossible, repeated Swann. Here we have a charming man who has
travelled thousands of miles to get to where we are. He can be very
useful to us. Were he to sign your list, he would simply be compromising
himself with his own people, would be castigated on our account, would
perhaps repent of his confidences and not give us any more.’ What was
more, Swann withheld his own name. He thought it too Hebraic not to have
the wrong effect. And besides, although he approved of everything where
the review was concerned, he wanted no part in the anti-militarist
campaign. He was wearing, which he had never done up until now, the
decoration he had won as a very young militiaman in ’70,⁸⁵ and he added
a codicil to his will asking that, contrary to his previous
dispositions, he should be granted the military honours due to his rank
as a Chevalier of the Légion d’Honneur.⁸⁶ This assembled around the
church at Combray a whole squadron of those troopers for whose future
Françoise used to weep when she contemplated the prospect of a war. In
short, Swann refused to sign Bloch’s round-robin, so that, though he
passed in the eyes of many for a fanatical Dreyfusard, my school-fellow
considered him lukewarm, infected with nationalism, and a jingo. Swann
left me without shaking me by the hand so as not to be obliged to make
his farewells in a room where he had too many friends, but he said to
me: ‘You ought to come and see your friend Gilberte. She has really
grown up and changed, you wouldn’t recognize her. She’d be so happy!’ I
no longer loved Gilberte. She was for me like a dead person whom one has
long mourned, but then oblivion has set in, and, were she to be
resurrected, she would no longer be able to insert herself into a life
no longer made for her. I had no desire to see her any more, nor the
desire even to show her that I was not keen to see her which every day,
when I loved her, I promised myself I would display once I no longer
loved her.

And so, seeking now only to make it look, where Gilberte was concerned,
as if I had wished with all my heart to see her again, but had been
prevented from doing so by so-called circumstances ‘outside my control’,
which in fact occur, in any coherent way at least, only once our will
does not go against them, very far from giving a cautious welcome to
Swann’s invitation, I did not leave him until he had promised me to
explain in detail to his daughter the untoward events that had deprived
me, and would deprive me still, from going to visit her. ‘Anyway, I
shall write to her in a minute when I get home, I added. But do tell her
it will be a letter of threats, for in a month or two, I shall be
completely free, and then let her tremble, for I shall be round as often
as in the old days even.’

Before leaving Swann, I had a word with him about his health. ‘No, it’s
not as bad as all that, he replied. At all events, as I told you, I’m
rather tired and I’m resigned in advance to accepting what may happen.
Only, I confess it would be very irritating to die before the end of the
Dreyfus Affair. Those scum have more than one trick up their sleeves. I
don’t doubt they’ll be beaten in the end, but they’re very influential,
they’ve got support everywhere. Just when it’s going best, everything
gives way. I’d like to live long enough to see Dreyfus rehabilitated⁸⁷
and Picquart a colonel.’

Once Swann had left, I returned into the large drawing-room where the
Princesse de Guermantes was, with whom I did not then know I was one day
to be such good friends. The passion that she felt for M. de Charlus did
not at first reveal itself to me. I merely observed that the Baron, from
a certain time on, and without breaking out into any of that hostility
towards the Princesse de Guermantes that with him was never a surprise,
while continuing to have as much, or perhaps even more affection for
her, seemed irritated and displeased whenever anyone mentioned her to
him. He no longer ever put her name down on the list of people with whom
he wished to dine.

It is true that before this, I had heard a very malicious member of
society say that the Princesse was altogether changed, that she was in
love with M. de Charlus, but this slander had seemed to me absurd and
made me indignant. I had certainly been surprised to observe that, when
I was recounting something concerning myself, should M. de Charlus be
introduced into the middle of it, the Princesse’s attention was at once
drawn a notch tighter, to become that of an invalid who, listening to us
talking about ourselves, and consequently in a casual and distracted
fashion, suddenly recognizes a name to be that of the illness he is
suffering from, which both interests and delights him. Thus, were I to
say to her: ‘M. de Charlus was in fact telling me…’, the Princesse would
gather up the slackened reins of her attention. On one occasion, having
said in her presence that at that moment M. de Charlus was quite drawn
to a certain person, I was astonished to see insert itself into the
Princesse’s eyes the different, momentary line that traces something
like the wake of a fissure in the pupils and which originates in a
thought that our words have, without our knowing, stirred up in the
person to whom we are speaking, a secret thought that will not betray
itself by words but will rise up from the depths we have disturbed to
the momentarily impaired surface of the eyes. But if my words had
affected the Princesse, I did not suspect in what way.

A little time later, she began anyway talking to me about M. de Charlus,
and almost openly. If she made allusion to the rumours that a few people
were circulating concerning the Baron, it was only as though to absurd
and infamous inventions. On the other hand, she said: ‘I consider that
any woman who lost her heart to a man of Palamède’s immense worth should
have a sufficiently high outlook, and sufficient devotion, to accept and
understand him as a whole, just as he is, to respect his freedom, his
fancies, to seek only to smooth out his difficulties and console him for
his sorrows.’ By which remarks, vague though they were, the Princesse de
Guermantes revealed what she was seeking to magnify, in just the same
way as M. de Charlus himself sometimes did. Have I not heard the latter
say on more than one occasion to people who up until then had been
unsure whether he was being traduced or not: ‘I, who have had many ups
and many downs in my life, who have known all sorts of people, thieves
as well as kings, and even, I have to say, with a slight preference for
the thieves, who have pursued beauty in all its forms, etc.’, and by
these words, which he thought clever, and by denying rumours that they
did not suspect had been circulating (or to make an allowance for the
truth, out of an inclination, or a sense of proportion, or a concern for
verisimilitude, that he alone adjudged to be minimal), he removed the
last doubts concerning him of some, and inspired the first doubts in
those who had not as yet felt any. For the most dangerous of all forms
of concealment is that of the fault itself in the mind of the guilty
person. His own permanent awareness of it prevents him from imagining
how general ignorance of it is, how readily a complete falsehood would
be believed and, in return, from appreciating at what degree of
truthfulness confession begins for others, in words that he believes to
be innocent. Moreover, he would in any case have been quite wrong to
seek to suppress it, for there are no vices that in high society cannot
find complaisant support, and the domestic arrangements of a château
have been known to be turned upside down so that a sister may sleep next
to her sister, the moment it was known that she did not have a merely
sisterly love for her. But what suddenly revealed the Princesse’s love
to me was a particular fact that I shall not dwell on here, for it forms
part of the quite different story in which M. de Charlus allowed a queen
to die rather than miss the hairdresser who was to use the curling tongs
on him for the sake of a bus conductor by whom he found himself
prodigiously intimidated.⁸⁸ However, in order to have done with the
Princesse’s love, let me say what the trifle was that opened my eyes. On
the day in question, I was alone with her in her carriage. Just as we
were going past a postbox, she made it stop. She had not brought a
footman with her. She half drew a letter out from her muff and made as
if to descend in order to put it in the box. I tried to stop her, she
put up a slight struggle, and we both of us now realized that our first
movement had been, hers compromising for seeming to be protecting a
secret, mine tactless for opposing itself to that protection. She was
quickest regaining possession of herself. Suddenly going very red, she
gave me the letter, I no longer dared not take it, but, as I put it into
the box I saw, without wanting to, that it was addressed to M. de
Charlus.

To go back in time and to that first soirée at the Princesse de
Guermantes’s, I went to take my leave of her, for her cousins were
driving me home and were in a great hurry. M. de Guermantes wanted,
however, to say good-bye to his brother. Mme de Surgis having had the
time, in a doorway, to tell the Duc that M. de Charlus had been charming
to both her and her sons, this great kindness on his brother’s part, the
first in this connection that the latter had shown, touched Basin deeply
and reawoke in him family feelings that were never dormant for long.
Just as we were taking our leave of the Princesse, he insisted, without
declaring his gratitude to M. de Charlus in so many words, on expressing
his fondness for him, whether because he in fact found it hard to
contain, or else so that the Baron might remember that the kind of
action he had performed that evening had not gone unobserved by the eyes
of a brother, just as, with the object of creating salutary associations
of memories for the future, we give a lump of sugar to a dog that has
sat up and begged. ‘Well, well, young brother, said the Duc, stopping M.
de Charlus and taking him affectionately under his arm, so that’s how we
walk past our older brother without so much as a small hello. I never
see you any more, Mémé, and you don’t know how much I miss you. Looking
for some old letters I in fact found some from poor Mama that were all
so full of affection for you. – Thank you, Basin,’ replied M. de Charlus
in a strained voice, for he could never speak of their mother without
emotion. ‘You ought to make up your mind to let me fix up a cottage for
you at Guermantes,’ the Duc went on. ‘It’s nice to see the two brothers
so affectionate with one another, said the Princesse to Oriane. – Oh,
indeed, I don’t think you can find many brothers like that. I shall
invite you with him, she promised me. You’re not in his bad books?… But
what can they have to say to each other?’ she added, in an anxious tone,
for she could hear their words only imperfectly. She had always felt a
certain jealousy at the pleasure M. de Guermantes experienced in talking
with his brother about a past which he rather kept from his wife. She
sensed that, when they were glad to be in one another’s company like
this and when she, no longer able to restrain her impatient curiosity,
came to join them, her arrival did not please them. But this evening, a
second jealousy was added to this habitual one. For if Mme de Surgis had
recounted to M. de Guermantes the kindnesses his brother had shown, so
that he might thank him, devoted woman friends of the Guermantes couple
had at the same time thought they should warn the Duchesse that her
husband’s mistress had been seen deep in conversation with his brother.
And Mme de Guermantes agonized over that. ‘Remember how happy we were in
the old days at Guermantes, the Duc went on, addressing himself to M. de
Charlus. If you were sometimes to come there in the summer, we could
resume our good life. Do you remember old father Courveau: “Why is
Pascal _troublant_? Because he is _trou_… trou…” – “_blê_’,’ pronounced
M. de Charlus, as if he were still answering his teacher. ‘ “And why is
Pascal _troublé_? Because he is _trou_… because he is _trou_…” –
_blanc_⁸⁹ – “Very good, you will pass, you will certainly get a
distinction, and Mme la Duchesse will present you with a Chinese
dictionary.” – Because you remember, Basin, at that time, Basin, I had a
thing about Chinese. – Do I not remember, my dear Mémé! And that old
porcelain vase that Hervey de Saint-Denis⁹⁰ brought you back, I can see
it now. You’d been threatening us you’d go and spend the whole of your
life in China, so smitten were you by the country; you already loved
going off on long jaunts. Oh, you were someone out of the ordinary, for
it can be said that in nothing did you have the same tastes as everyone
else…’ But hardly had he spoken these words before the Duc went red as a
beetroot, as they say, for he knew, if not of his brother’s habits, then
at least of his reputation. As he never spoke about it to him, he was
all the more embarrassed at having said something that might seem to
refer to it, and even more so at having appeared embarrassed. After a
second’s silence: ‘Who knows, he said, in order to erase his last words,
perhaps you were in love with a Chinese girl before loving so many white
ones and finding favour with them, if I’m to judge by a certain lady to
whom you have certainly given pleasure this evening by talking to her.
She found you enchanting.’ The Duc had promised himself not to talk
about Mme de Surgis but, in the midst of the disarray into which the
gaffe he had made had just thrown his thoughts, he had snatched at the
nearest one, which was the very one that ought not to have appeared in
the conversation, even if it had led to it. But M. de Charlus had
noticed his brother go red in the face. And, like a guilty man not
wishing to appear embarrassed by having the crime he is supposed not to
have committed discussed in front of him, and who thinks that he should
prolong a perilous conversation: ‘I’m charmed, he replied, but I insist
on returning to what you said before that, which strikes me as
profoundly true. You said that I have never had the same ideas as other
people, you didn’t say ideas, you said tastes. How right that is! I’ve
never had the same tastes as other people in anything, how right that
is! You said I had particular tastes. – No, no,’ protested M. de
Guermantes, who in fact had not used those words and perhaps did not
believe in the reality they denoted in his brother’s case. Did he think
he had the right, moreover, to harass him on account of singularities
which had in any case remained sufficiently doubtful or sufficiently
secret as in no way to harm the Baron’s immense position? What was more,
sensing that this position of his brother’s was going to be of service
to his mistresses, the Duc told himself that this was well worth a few
kindnesses in return; had he had knowledge at that time of any ‘special’
liaison of his brother’s, M. de Guermantes, in the hope of the support
the latter would lend him, a hope allied to the pious memory of days
gone by, would have overlooked it, closing his eyes to it, and if need
be lending a hand. ‘Come, Basin; good evening, Palamède,’ said the
Duchesse, who, gnawed at by rage and curiosity, could stand no more, ‘if
you’ve decided to spend the night here, we’d do better to stay to
supper. You’ve been keeping Marie and me standing here for the last
half-hour.’ The Duc left his brother after a meaningful embrace and we
all three descended the immense staircase of the Princesse’s _hôtel_.

On either side, on the topmost steps, couples were spread out waiting
for their carriages to be brought up. Erect, isolated, having at her
side her husband and myself, the Duchesse stood on the left of the
staircase, already wrapped in her Tiepolo cloak, the collar fastened by
the clasp of rubies, being devoured by the eyes of women and of men,
seeking to chance upon the secret of her elegance and her beauty.
Waiting for her carriage on the same stair as Mme de Guermantes, but at
the opposite end, Mme de Gallardon, who had long since lost all hope of
receiving her cousin’s visit, had turned her back so as not to appear to
have seen her, and above all so as not to present proof that the latter
had not acknowledged her. Mme de Gallardon was in a very spiteful mood
because some gentlemen who were with her had thought they should bring
up the subject of Oriane: ‘I’m not in the least anxious to see her, she
had replied, I caught sight of her just now, in any case, she’s
beginning to age; it seems she can’t come to terms with it. Basin
himself says so. And I can well understand that, because, since she’s
not intelligent, is a thoroughly nasty piece of work, and has a bad way
with her, she certainly feels that, once she’s no longer beautiful,
she’ll have nothing left at all.’

I had put on my overcoat, for which M. de Guermantes, who was afraid of
catching a chill, reproved me as he went down with me, because of how
warm it was. And the generation of noblemen who have more or less passed
through the hands of Monseigneur Dupanloup⁹¹ speak such bad French (the
Castellanes⁹² excepted), that the Duc expressed his thought thus: ‘It’s
better not to be covered up before going outside, at least _as a general
thesis_.’ I can still see that whole departure, still see, if I am not
mistaken in placing him on that staircase, a portrait removed from its
frame, the Prince de Sagan,⁹³ whose last society soirée this was to be,
uncovering himself in order to pay his respects to the Duchesse, with so
sweeping a revolution of his top-hat in his white-gloved hand, which
matched the gardenia in his buttonhole, that you were surprised it was
not a felt hat with a feather from the Ancien Régime, several ancestral
faces from which were reproduced exactly in that of the great nobleman.
He remained beside her for only a short time, but his attitudes, however
momentary, sufficed to compose a whole _tableau vivant_, a scene from
history as it were. Moreover, as he has since died, and as I hardly did
more than catch sight of him in his lifetime, he has become for me so
much a character out of history, of the history of society at least,
that I sometimes feel astonishment when I reflect that a woman and a man
whom I know are his sister and his nephew.

As we were going down the stairs, there came up them, with an air of
lassitude that suited her, a woman who looked to be about forty though
she was more than that. This was the Princesse d’Orvillers, a natural
daughter, it was said, of the Duc de Parme, whose soft voice was marked
by a vague Austrian accent. She advanced, tall, stooped, in a dress of
flowered white silk, allowing her delectable bosom to beat, palpitating
and exhausted, through a harness of diamonds and sapphires. Tossing her
head like a royal mare encumbered by its halter of pearls, of
inestimable value but an uncomfortable weight, she rested her gentle,
charming gaze first here, then there, of a blue which, as it began to
weaken, became more caressing still, and gave a friendly nod of the head
to the majority of the departing guests. ‘A fine time to be arriving,
Paulette! said the Duchesse. – Oh, I’m so very sorry! But truly, there
wasn’t the physical possibility,’ answered the Princesse d’Orvillers,
who had got this sort of expression from the Duchesse de Guermantes, but
who brought to it her natural gentleness and the air of sincerity lent
by the vigour of a remotely Teutonic accent in so affectionate a voice.
She seemed to be alluding to complications in her life too lengthy to be
spoken of, and not to common or garden soirées, though she was at that
moment returning from several. But it was not these that had forced her
to arrive so late. Since the Prince de Guermantes had for long years
prevented his wife from receiving Mme d’Orvillers, the latter, once the
ban was lifted, contented herself with replying to the invitations, so
as not to appear to be craving them, simply by leaving a card. After two
or three years of this method, she came in person, but very late, as if
after the theatre. In this way, she made it seem as if she cared nothing
about the soirée, or about being seen there, but was simply coming to
pay a visit to the Prince and the Princesse, for their sake alone, out
of sympathy, at the time when, three-quarters of the guests having left,
she would ‘enjoy them more’. ‘Oriane has really sunk as low as you can
go, grumbled Mme de Gallardon. I don’t understand Basin letting her talk
to Mme d’Orvillers. M. de Gallardon wasn’t the man to have let me do
that.’ For my part, I had recognized in Mme d’Orvillers the woman who,
near the Guermantes _hôtel_, had cast long, languorous looks at me, had
turned round and had stopped in front of shop windows. Mme de Guermantes
introduced me, Mme d’Orvillers was charming, neither too friendly nor
prickly. She looked at me as at everyone else, out of her gentle eyes…
But never again was I to receive from her, when I met her, a single one
of those overtures in which she had seemed to be offering herself. There
are particular looks which appear to recognize you, that a young man
only ever receives from certain women – or certain men – up until the
day when they get to know you and learn that you are the friend of
people with whom they, too, are connected.

They announced that the carriage had been brought up. Mme de Guermantes
gathered up her red skirt as if to go downstairs and get into the
carriage, but, seized perhaps by remorse, or by the desire to give
pleasure and above all to take advantage of the brevity that the
physical impediment to prolonging it imposed on so tiresome an action,
she looked at Mme de Gallardon; then, as if she had only just noticed
her, taken with an inspiration, she retraversed the whole length of the
stair, before descending, and, having reached her delighted cousin, held
out her hand to her. ‘How long it has been!’ the Duchesse said, and
then, so as not to have to expand on all that this formula purported to
contain by way of regrets and legitimate excuses, she turned with an
expression of alarm towards the Duc, who had, in fact, gone down with me
to the carriage, and was furious on finding that his wife had set off
towards Mme de Gallardon and was holding up the movement of the other
carriages. ‘Oriane is still very beautiful all the same! said Mme de
Gallardon. People amuse me when they say there’s no love lost between
us; we may, for reasons we have no need to divulge to others, go for
years without seeing one another, we have too many memories in common to
be able ever to be separated, and, deep down, she knows very well that
she loves me more than so many of the people she sees every day and who
are not of her blood.’ Mme de Gallardon indeed was like those spurned
lovers who want at all costs to make you believe that they are better
loved than those whom their fair one dotes on. And (by the praises with
which, untroubled by any contradiction with what she had been saying
just before, she was so lavish when speaking of the Duchesse de
Guermantes) she proved indirectly that the latter had a thorough command
of the maxims that should guide a woman of high fashion in her career,
who, at the very moment when the most wonderful of her outfits is
exciting, as well as admiration, envy, knows how to cross a whole
staircase in order to disarm it. ‘At least take care not to get your
shoes wet’ (there had been a brief downpour), said the Duc, who was
still furious at having waited.

On the way back, so exiguous was the coupé, the red shoes necessarily
found themselves in close proximity to my own, and Mme de Guermantes,
afraid they might even have touched them, said to the Duc: ‘This young
man is going to be obliged to say to me, like in some cartoon or other:
“Madame, tell me here and now that you love me, but don’t tread on my
feet like that.”⁹⁴ My thoughts as it happens were at some remove from
Mme de Guermantes. Ever since Saint-Loup had spoken to me of a high-born
girl who went into a brothel and of the Baronne Putbus’s lady’s maid, it
was in these two individuals that, formed into a single whole, were now
subsumed the longings inspired in me daily by so many beauties of two
classes, the vulgar and magnificent on the one hand, the majestic
lady’s-maids from great houses, puffed up with pride, who say “we” when
speaking of duchesses, and on the other hand, the girls whose names it
was enough at times that I should have read in the account of a ball,
without even having seen them go past in a carriage or on foot, for me
to fall in love with them, and having searched painstakingly through the
_Annuaire des châteaux_⁹⁵ for where they were spending the summer
(allowing myself very often to be led astray by a similarity in the
names), I would dream of going by turns to inhabit the plains of the
West, the sand dunes of the North or the pine woods of the Midi. But for
all that I had fused together all the most exquisite carnal substance so
as to constitute, following the ideal traced out for me by Saint-Loup,
the dissolute young girl and Mme Putbus’s lady’s-maid, my two
possessible beauties lacked what I could not know until I had once set
eyes on them: an individual character. I was to tire myself out seeking
vainly to imagine, during the months when my desire turned rather to
young girls, what the one whom Saint-Loup had talked to me about was
like in her person, or who she was, and during the months when I would
have preferred a lady’s-maid, that of Mme Puthbus. But how restful,
after being perpetually troubled by my anxious longings for so many
fugitive creatures whose names even I often did not know, who were in
any case so hard to find, even more so to get to know and impossible
perhaps to conquer, to have selected from out of all this scattered,
fugitive and anonymous beauty, two choice specimens complete with their
descriptions, whom I was at least sure of procuring for myself when I
wanted! I deferred the moment of starting on this twofold pleasure, as I
did that of working, but the certainty of enjoying it whenever I wanted
excused me almost from taking it, like the sleeping pills that it is
enough to have within reach of our hand for us no longer to need them
but to fall asleep. I now desired only two women in the world, whose
faces, it is true, I could not manage to picture to myself, but whose
names Saint-Loup had given me and whose compliance he had guaranteed. So
that, if by his words of a little earlier he had imposed an arduous task
on my imagination, he had, in return, procured a considerable relaxation
and a lasting respite for my will.

‘Well, the Duchesse said to me, apart from balls, can I not be of any
use to you? Have you found a salon where you’d like me to introduce
you?’ I replied that I was afraid that the only one which tempted me
might be too unfashionable for her. ‘Who is it?’ she asked in a husky,
threatening tone, almost without opening her mouth. ‘The Baronne
Putbus.’ This time she feigned genuine anger. ‘Oh, no, not her, I think
you’re having me on. I don’t even know by what mischance I know the name
of that cow. She’s the dregs of society. It’s like asking me to
introduce you to my haberdasher. Or then again, no, because my
haberdasher is charming. You’re a little mad, my poor boy. In any case,
I ask you as a favour to be polite to the people I’ve introduced you to,
to leave cards with them, to go and call on them and not to mention the
Baronne Putbus, who is not known to them.’ I asked whether Mme
d’Orvillers was not a little loose. ‘Oh, not at all, you’re muddling her
up, she’s prudish if anything. Isn’t she, Basin?’ – Yes, at any event I
don’t think she’s ever given rise to any talk,’ said the Duc.

‘You won’t come with us to the costume ball? he asked me. I’d lend you a
Venetian cloak, and I know someone it’d damn well give pleasure to, to
Oriane for one, but that’s not worth saying, no, the Princesse de Parme.
She’s forever singing your praises, she swears only by you. You’re lucky
– since she’s on the mature side – that her morals are impeccable.
Otherwise she’d have certainly taken you for her sigisbeo, as they used
to say in my youth, a sort of _cavaliere servente_.’

It was not the costume ball I wanted, but my rendez-vous with Albertine.
Thus I refused. The carriage had stopped, the footman asked for the
_porte cochère_, the horses pawed the ground until it had been opened to
its full width and the carriage entered into the courtyard. ‘Toodle-oo,
the Duc said to me. – I’ve sometimes regretted living so near Marie, the
Duchesse said to me, for I may be very fond of her, but I’m less fond of
seeing her. But I’ve never regretted the proximity so much as this
evening, because it means my remaining so short a time with you. – Come
on, Oriane, no speeches.’ The Duchesse would have liked me to go in with
them briefly. She gave a loud laugh, as did the Duc, when I said I could
not because in fact a girl was due to come and call on me. ‘You receive
your calls at a very strange hour, she said. – Come on, _mon petit_,
let’s get a move on, said M. de Guermantes to his wife. It’s a quarter
to midnight and time to get our costumes on…’ In front of his door he
came up against its stern guardians, the two ladies with sticks who had
not been afraid to come down from their mountain-top by night in order
to avert a scandal. ‘Basin, we were anxious to warn you, in case you
were to be seen at that costume ball: poor Amanien has just died, an
hour ago.’ The Duc felt a momentary alarm. He could see the famous
costume ball foundering for him from the moment when, via these accursed
mountain-dwellers, he had been warned of M. d’Osmond’s death. But he
very soon recovered himself and into the remark that he hurled at the
two cousins, he put, along with the determination not to renounce a
pleasure, his inability to assimilate accurately the locutions of the
French language: ‘He’s died! No, no, they’re exaggerating, they’re
exaggerating!’⁹⁶ And paying no further attention to his two kinswomen,
who, alpenstocks at the ready, were about to make their ascent into the
night, he hurried off to learn the latest by questioning his valet: ‘Has
my helmet come? – Yes, Monsieur le Duc. – Is there a little hole to
breathe through? I don’t want to be asphyxiated, damn it all! – Yes,
Monsieur le Duc. – Oh, hell’s teeth, I’m having a bad evening. Oriane, I
forgot to ask Babal whether the poulaine slippers were for you! – But
the wardrobe master from the Opéra-Comique is here, he’ll tell us,
dearest. I don’t myself think they can go with your spurs. – Let’s go
and find the wardrobe master, said the Duc. Goodbye, my boy, I’d
certainly say come in with us while we’re trying them on, you’d be
amused. But we’d talk, it’s coming up to midnight and we mustn’t arrive
late if the party’s to be complete.’

I, too, was in a hurry to leave M. and Mme de Guermantes as soon as I
could. _Phèdre_ had finished around half-past eleven. Having had time to
come, Albertine must have arrived. I went straight to Françoise: ‘Is
Mlle Albertine here? – No one has come.’ Good God, did that mean that no
one would be coming? I was in torment, Albertine’s visit now seeming all
the more desirable for being less certain. Françoise, too, was annoyed,
but for quite another reason. She had just sat her daughter down at the
table for a succulent meal. But hearing me arrive, and finding there was
no time to remove the dishes and lay out needles and thread, as if it
were a matter of needlework and not of supper: ‘She’s just had a
spoonful of soup, Françoise said to me, and I forced her to suck on a
bit of the carcass,’ so as thus to reduce her daughter’s supper to
nothing, as though it would have been wrong for it to be plentiful. Even
at lunch or at dinner, if I made the mistake of going into the kitchen,
Françoise would make as if they had finished and even apologize by
saying: ‘I just wanted a _bite of something_’, or ‘a _mouthful_’. But
you were soon reassured on seeing the multitude of dishes littering the
table, which Françoise, taken by surprise by my sudden entry, like the
malefactor that she was not, had not had time to make disappear. Then
she added: ‘Come on, off to bed, you’ve done enough work as it is today
(for she wanted her daughter to appear not only not to be costing us
anything, to live by going without, but also to be working herself to
death on our behalf). You’re only cluttering up the kitchen and above
all getting in Monsieur’s way, who’s expecting a visit. Come on,
upstairs,’ she went on, as if she were obliged to exert her authority to
send her daughter to bed, who, the moment her supper had misfired, was
there purely for effect and who, had I remained five minutes longer,
would have decamped of her own accord. And turning to me, in that
beautiful, uneducated yet slightly individual French of hers: ‘Monsieur
can’t see she’s got sleep written all over her face.’ I remained,
overjoyed at not having to talk to Françoise’s daughter.

She came, as I have said, from a small village which was right next door
to that of her mother, yet different by the nature of the soil, the
cultivation, the patois and certain peculiarities of the inhabitants
above all. Thus ‘the butcher’s wife’ and Françoise’s niece got on very
badly, but had this much in common, that, when going off on an errand,
they would linger for hours ‘at the sister’s’ or ‘at the cousin’s, being
incapable of ending a conversation of their own accord, a conversation
in the course of which the reason that had led them to go out vanished,
to the point where, if you said to them on their return: ‘Well, will M.
le Marquis de Norpois be at home at a quarter to six?’, they wouldn’t
even slap their foreheads and say ‘Oh, I’ve forgotten,’ but ‘Oh, I
didn’t realize Monsieur had asked that, I thought I was only to wish him
good day.’ But although they might ‘go haywire’ in this way concerning
something said one hour earlier, it was impossible in return to rid
their heads of what they had once heard the sister or the cousin say.
Thus, if the butcher’s wife had heard it said that the English had made
war on us in ’70 at the same time as the Prussians (and it was no good
my explaining that this was not the case), every three weeks the
butcher’s wife would repeat to me in the course of a conversation: ‘It’s
‘cos of that war the English made on us in ’70 at the same time as the
Prussians. – But I’ve told you a hundred times you’re mistaken.’ She
would reply, which implied that her conviction was in no way shaken:
‘That’s no reason to hold a grudge against them in any case. A lot of
water’s flowed under the bridge since ’70,’ and so on. On another
occasion, advocating a war with England, of which I disapproved, she
said: ‘Of course, no war’s always better; but since we must, better to
get on with it right away. As the sister explained just now, since that
war the English made on us in ’70, the trade agreements have been
ruining us. After we’ve beaten them, they won’t let a single Englishman
enter France without paying three hundred francs for admission, like us
now to go to England.’

Such, apart from a great deal of honesty and, when they spoke, a
stubborn determination not to let themselves be interrupted, to take up
again twenty times over at the point where they had been interrupted,
which ended by lending to their remarks the unshakable solidity of a
Bach fugue, was the character of the inhabitants of this small locality,
who numbered barely five hundred and which was bounded by its chestnut
trees, its willows, and its fields of potatoes and beetroot.

Françoise’s daughter, on the other hand, looking on herself as a modern
woman who had abandoned the well-worn paths, spoke the argot of Paris
and avoided none of the jokes that went with it. Françoise having told
her that I had just come from a princess’s: ‘Ah, a bargain-basement
princess no doubt.’ Seeing that I was expecting a visit, she pretended
to believe that my name was Charles. I replied innocently that it was
not, which enabled her to get in: ‘Oh, I thought it was! And I’d been
saying to myself Charlatan (_Charles attend_)’. It was not in very good
taste. But I was less indifferent when, as consolation for Albertine’s
lateness, she said to me: ‘I fancy you can wait for her till you’re blue
in the face. She won’t come. Oh, our good-time girls today!’

Thus her way of talking differed from that of her mother; but what is
more intriguing is that her mother’s way of talking differed from that
of her grandmother, a native of Bailleau-le-Pin,⁹⁷ which was so close to
Françoise’s village. Yet the patois differed slightly, like the two
landscapes. Françoise’s mother’s village, on a slope and descending into
a ravine, was frequented by willow trees. And a long way from there, on
the other hand, there was in France a small region where they spoke
almost exactly the same patois as in Méséglise. I made this discovery
simultaneously with experiencing the nuisance of it. In fact, I once
found Françoise deep in conversation with one of the housemaids, who
came from that area and spoke its patois. They almost understood one
another, I understood them not at all, they knew this but did not for
that reason desist, being excused, so they thought, by the joy of being
fellow-countrywomen though born so far away from one another, to go on
speaking this alien tongue in my presence, as when we do not want to be
understood. These colourful studies in linguistic geography and its
attendant camaraderie were pursued each week in the kitchen, without my
deriving any pleasure from them.

As, each time the _porte cochère_ was opened, the concierge pressed an
electric button which lit the staircase, and as none of the tenants had
not now returned, I at once left the kitchen and went back to sit in the
ante-room, to keep watch, at the point where the curtain, slightly too
narrow to cover completely the glazed door to our apartment, let through
the dark vertical strip made by the semi-blackness on the stairs. Should
this strip suddenly turn pale gold, it would mean that Albertine had
just come in down below and would be with me in a couple of minutes; no
one else could any longer be arriving at that hour. And there I stayed,
unable to take my eyes off the strip, which persisted in remaining dark;
I leaned right over so as to be sure of seeing properly; but my looking
was in vain, the vertical black line, for all my passionate longing, did
not yield me the intoxicating happiness I would have felt had I seen it
change, by some sudden, meaningful magic, into a luminous bar of gold.
All this anxiety for that same Albertine to whom I had not given three
minutes’ thought during the Guermantes soirée! But, by reawakening the
feelings of expectancy I had felt of old in connection with other girls,
with Gilberte above all, when she was late in arriving, the possible
deprivation of a simple physical pleasure caused me cruel moral
suffering.

I had to go back into my room. Françoise came in after me. Since I had
returned from my soirée, she considered it pointless that I should keep
the rose I had in my buttonhole, and came over to remove it. By
reminding me that Albertine might no longer be coming, and by obliging
me also to admit that I wanted to look smart for her, her action
produced an irritation in me which was renewed by the fact that, in
tearing myself violently free, I crumpled the flower and that Françoise
said to me: ‘It’d have been better to let me take it away rather than
spoil it like that.’ Her every least word exasperated me, moreover. When
we are waiting, so much do we suffer by the absence of what we desire
that we cannot tolerate another presence.

Françoise having left the room, I reflected that, if now it had come
down to my fussing over my appearance with regard to Albertine, it was
very unfortunate that I had so many times appeared before her
ill-shaven, with several days’ growth of beard, on the evenings when I
had let her come to renew our caresses. I felt that, neglectful of me,
she had been leaving me alone. To improve my room a little, were
Albertine still to arrive, and because it was one of the prettiest
things I possessed, I put back, for the first time in years, on the
table that stood beside my bed, the turquoise-studded slip-cover
Gilberte had had made for me to hold Bergotte’s little volume, and which
I had for a long time wanted to keep with me while I slept, next to the
agate marble. At any event, as much perhaps as Albertine, who had still
not come, her presence at that moment in an ‘elsewhere’ that she had
evidently found more agreeable, and that I did not know, produced in me
a painful feeling which, despite what I had said, scarcely an hour
before, to Swann, as to my inability to feel jealousy, might perhaps,
had I seen my loved one at less distant intervals, have turned into an
anxious need to learn where, and with whom, she was spending her time. I
did not dare send round to Albertine’s, it was too late, but in the hope
that, having supper perhaps with friends, in a café, she might take it
into her head to telephone me, I turned the selector switch and, by
restoring the connection to my room, cut it off between the post office
and the concierge’s lodge, to which it was ordinarily linked at that
hour. To have had a receiver in the narrow corridor on to which
Françoise’s room opened would have been simpler and less of a
disturbance, but useless. The progress of civilization enables each one
of us to manifest unsuspected virtues or new vices, which make us either
dearer or more unbearable to our friends. Thus it was that Edison’s
discovery⁹⁸ had enabled Françoise to acquire one more defect, which was
to refuse, whatever its utility, however urgent it might be, to make use
of the telephone. Whenever you tried to teach her, she found a means of
escape, as others do on the point of being vaccinated. And so the
telephone had been placed in my room and, so that it should not
inconvenience my parents, the bell had been replaced by a simple rotary
sound. For fear of not hearing it, I did not move. So unmoving was I
indeed that, for the first time in months, I noticed the ticking of the
clock. Françoise came in to put things away. She talked with me, but I
detested the conversation, beneath the uniformly trite continuity of
which my feelings were changing minute by minute, passing from fear to
anxiety, and from anxiety to total disappointment. Unlike the vaguely
contented words I felt obliged to address to her, I sensed my face to
look so unhappy that I pretended I was suffering from a rheumatism in
order to account for the disparity between my feigned indifference and
this pained expression; and then I was afraid that the words uttered by
Françoise, albeit in a low voice (not on account of Albertine, for she
considered the hour of her possible arrival to have long passed), risked
preventing me from hearing the saving call that would not now be coming.
Finally, Françoise went off to bed; I dismissed her roughly but quietly,
so that the noise she made going off should not drown that of the
telephone. And I began once again to listen, and to suffer; when we are
waiting, the double trajectory, from the ear that gathers in the sounds
to the mind which processes and analyses them, and from the mind to the
heart to which it transmits its results, is so rapid that we are unable
even to perceive its duration, and we seem to be listening directly with
our hearts.

I was tortured by the ceaseless recurrence of my longing, ever more
anxious but never fulfilled, for the sound of a call; having arrived at
the culminating point of a harrowing ascent within the spirals of my
solitary anguish, from the depths of a populous, nocturnal Paris,
brought suddenly close to me, next to my bookcase, I all of a sudden
heard, mechanical and sublime, like the brandished scarf or the
shepherd’s pipe in _Tristan_,⁹⁹ the spinning-top sound of the telephone.
I dashed to it, it was Albertine. ‘I’m not disturbing you ringing at
this hour? – No, no…’ I said, containing my delight, for what she had
said about the untoward hour was no doubt her apology for being on the
point of arriving, this late, not because she was not going to come.
‘Are you coming? I asked, in an indifferent voice. – Well… no, if you
don’t absolutely need me.’

One part of me, which the other part was seeking to rejoin, was in
Albertine. She had to come, but I did not tell her so at first; since we
had made contact, I told myself I could always force her, at the last
minute, either to come to me, or to let me hurry round to her. ‘Yes, I’m
close to home, she said, and quite a way from where you are; I didn’t
read your note properly. I’ve just found it again and I was afraid you
might be expecting me.’ I sensed that she was lying, and it was now, in
my fury, more from a need to inconvenience her than to see her, that I
wanted to force her to come. But first I was anxious to refuse what I
would try to obtain in a minute or two. But where was she? Other sounds
were mixed in with her words: a cyclist’s horn, the voice of a woman
singing, a brass band in the distance, sounded as distinctly as the
cherished voice, as if to prove that it was indeed Albertine in her
present surroundings who was close to me at that moment, like a clod of
earth with which you have carried off all the grasses round about it.
The same sounds that I could hear were striking her ear also and
hindering her from attending: truthful details, unconnected with the
subject, futile in themselves, but all the more necessary to reveal to
us the evidence of the miracle; prosaic, charming features, descriptive
of some Parisian street, yet cruel, sharp-pointed features also of an
unknown evening which, on leaving after _Phèdre_, had prevented
Albertine from coming to see me. ‘I must start by warning you that it’s
not so that you’ll come, because at this hour you’ll inconvenience me
greatly…, I said to her, I can’t keep my eyes open. Besides, well, a
whole host of complications. I have to tell you that there was no
possible misunderstanding in my letter. You answered that it was agreed.
So then, if you didn’t understand, what did you mean by that? – I said
it was agreed, only I couldn’t really remember what was agreed. But I
can tell you’re cross, and that bothers me. I regret having gone to
_Phèdre_. If I’d known it was going to lead to such a fuss…,’ she added,
like all those people who, in the wrong over one thing, make a pretence
of believing it is for another that they are being criticized. ‘_Phèdre_
has nothing to do with my displeasure, since it was I who asked you to
go to it. – Then, you’re annoyed with me, it’s a nuisance it’s so late
this evening, otherwise I’d have come round, but I’ll come tomorrow or
the day after to make my excuses. – Oh, no, Albertine, please, having
made me waste an evening, at least leave me in peace on the days
following. I shan’t be free before a fortnight or three weeks. Listen,
if it bothers you that we should be left with an impression of anger,
and perhaps basically you’re right, then I’d much prefer, it can’t make
me any more tired, since I’ve waited until this hour for you and you’re
still out, if you came right away, I’ll have some coffee to wake me up.
– Wouldn’t it be possible to put it off till tomorrow, because the
difficulty…’ Hearing these words of excuse, uttered as if she were not
going to come, I felt that a very different element was attempting
painfully to unite itself with the desire to set eyes once again on that
velvet face which already, at Balbec, had directed all my days towards
the moment when, in front of the mauve September sea, I would be beside
that pink flower. I had learned to recognize this terrible need for
another human being in Combray, in connection with my mother, to the
point of wanting to die if she got Françoise to tell me she could not
come upstairs. This effort of the old feeling to combine and form but a
single element with the other, more recent one, whose voluptuous object
was nothing more than the coloured surface, the carnation pink of a
flower of the sea-shore, such an effort often eventuates only in the
formation (in the chemical sense) of a new body, which may endure for a
few moments only. On that evening, at least, and for a long time to
come, the two elements remained dissociated. But already, from the last
words heard on the telephone, I had begun to realize that Albertine’s
life was located (not physically, of course) at so great a distance from
me that it would still have required wearisome investigations to lay my
hand on it, organized, furthermore, like battlefield fortifications and,
for greater surety, of the kind we later acquired the habit of referring
to as ‘camouflaged’. Albertine was part, moreover, at a more elevated
level of society, of that class of persons to whom the concierge
promises your messenger she will give the letter when she returns – up
until the day when you realize that it is none other than her, the
person met with outside and to whom you have taken the liberty of
writing, who is the concierge, so that she does indeed live – if only in
the porter’s lodge – at the house she had indicated (which is, on the
other hand, a small brothel, of which the concierge is the madam), or
else who gives as her address a building where she is known by
accomplices who will not betray her secret, from which your letters will
be forwarded to her, but where she does not live, where she has at most
only left some of her belongings. Existences disposed across five or six
lines of retreat, so that when you try to visit, or find out about, this
woman, you strike too far to the right, or too far to the left, or too
far in front or too far behind, and you may, for months or years on end,
learn nothing. With Albertine, I felt that I would never learn anything,
would never succeed in unravelling this tangled multiplicity of
authentic details and untruthful facts. And that it would always be
thus, unless I were to put her in prison (but people escape) up until
the end. On the evening in question, this conviction caused no more than
a misgiving to pass through me, though in it I could sense that there
quivered something like an anticipation of drawn-out suffering.

‘No, no, I replied, I’ve already told you I wouldn’t be free before
three weeks, tomorrow any more than any other day. – All right, then…
I’ll run round… It’s a nuisance, because I’m at a girl friend’s who…’ I
sensed that she hadn’t thought I would accept her suggestion that she
should come, which was not genuine therefore, and I wanted to make
things difficult for her. ‘Your friend’s no concern of mine. Come or
don’t come, that’s your affair, it’s not I who am asking you to come, it
was you who suggested it. – Don’t get angry, I’ll jump into a cab and be
with you in ten minutes.’ And so, out of that Paris from whose nocturnal
depths there had already emanated, all the way into my room, measuring
the radius of action of a distant being, the invisible message, what was
about suddenly to materialize and to appear, following this first
annunciation, was the Albertine I had known of old beneath the skies of
Balbec, when the waiters at the Grand-Hôtel, as they laid the tables,
were blinded by the light of the setting sun, when, the windows having
been drawn all the way back, the imperceptible evening breezes were free
to enter from the beach, where the last strollers still lingered, into
the vast dining-room, where the first diners were not yet seated, and
when, in the mirror set behind the bar, the red reflection of the hull
went past, and there long lingered the grey reflection of the smoke, of
the last boat for Rivebelle. I no longer asked myself what might have
caused Albertine to be late, and when Françoise entered my room to tell
me: ‘Mademoiselle Albertine is here’, if I answered without even moving
my head, this was only in order to dissemble: ‘What’s Mademoiselle
Albertine doing coming this late?’ But then, looking up at Françoise, as
if out of curiosity to get her response, which would corroborate the
apparent sincerity of my question, I saw, with admiration and with fury,
that, capable of rivalling Berma herself in the art of getting inanimate
garments and the features of her face to speak, Françoise had been able
to teach their lines to her blouse, to her hair, the whitest of which
had been brought to the surface and put on display like a birth
certificate, and to her neck, bowed by tiredness and by obedience. They
pitied her for having been dragged from her sleep and the fug of her
bed, in the middle of the night, at her age, and forced to get dressed
at high speed, at the risk of catching pneumonia. And so, afraid of
having appeared to be apologizing for Albertine’s tardy arrival:
‘Anyway, I’m very glad she’s come, it’s all for the best,’ and I let my
profound joy burst forth. It did not go long unalloyed, once I had heard
Françoise’s reply. She, without proffering any complaint, looking even
as if she were doing her best to suppress an irresistible cough, and
merely drawing her shawl about her as if she were cold, began by
retailing all that she had said to Albertine, not having failed to ask
her for news of her aunt. ‘That’s just what I was saying, Monsieur
must’ve been afraid Mademoiselle’s no longer coming, because this is no
hour to arrive, it’ll soon be morning. But she must’ve been in places
where she was having a good time because she didn’t even say she was
upset at having kept Monsieur waiting, she answered me as if she didn’t
give a fig for anyone: “Better late than never!” ’ Then Françoise added
the words that cut me to the quick: ‘She gave herself away, talking like
that. She might well have wanted to hide perhaps, but…’

I had no call to be greatly surprised. I have just said that, on the
errands she was sent on, Françoise rarely gave any account, if not of
what she had said, on which she gladly expounded, then at least of the
expected answer. But if, exceptionally, she did repeat what our friends
had said, however short it might be, she usually contrived, thanks if
need be to the expression or tone by which, she assured us, they had
been accompanied, to make them seem somehow hurtful. At a pinch, she
would accept having suffered a snub, probably imaginary as it happens,
from a tradesman to whom we had sent her, provided that, having been
addressed to her as our representative, she having spoken in our name,
this snub hit us on the rebound. You needed only to reply that she had
misunderstood, that she was suffering from a persecution mania and that
the tradespeople were not all in league against her. Their feelings
mattered little to me in any case. The same did not go for those of
Albertine. And by repeating those ironic words, ‘Better late than
never!’ Françoise at once evoked for me the friends in whose company
Albertine had ended her evening, finding more pleasure there than in my
own. ‘She’s comical, she’s got a little flat hat, with her big eyes, it
gives her a funny look, especially with her coat that she’d have done
well to send to the invisible amender’s because it’s all mangy. She
amuses me,’ added, as though making fun of Albertine, Françoise, who
rarely shared my impressions but felt a need to let her own be known. I
did not even want to appear as if I understood that this laugh denoted
disdain and mockery, but, in order to return blow for blow, I answered
Françoise, though I did not know the little hat she had been referring
to: ‘What you call a “little flat hat” is something quite simply
ravishing… – Like nothing at all, you mean,’ said Françoise, expressing,
openly this time, her genuine contempt. Then (in a quiet, more
deliberate tone, so that my untruthful reply might seem to be expressing
not my anger but the truth, but wasting no time on the other hand, so as
not to keep Albertine waiting), I addressed these cruel words to
Françoise: ‘You’re an excellent person, I said smarmily, you’re kind,
you’ve a thousand good qualities, but you’re no further on than the day
you arrived in Paris, either in knowing about women’s clothes or in how
to pronounce words properly and not commit howlers.’ This was a
particularly stupid criticism, because the French words we are so proud
of pronouncing accurately are themselves only ‘howlers’ made by Gallic
mouths in mispronouncing Latin or Saxon, our language being simply the
defective pronunciation of a few others. The genius of the language in
its living state, and the future and past of French, that is what should
have interested me in Françoise’s mistakes. Was her ‘amender’ for
‘mender’ not equally as curious as those animals surviving from remote
epochs, such as the whale or the giraffe, which demonstrate to us the
stages through which animal life has passed? ‘And, I added, seeing that
in all these years you haven’t managed to learn, you’ll never learn. But
you can take consolation, that doesn’t stop you from being a good soul,
or making a wonderful _boeuf à la gelée_ and countless other things
besides. The hat you think is simple was copied from one of the
Princesse de Guermantes’s hats which cost five hundred francs. Moreover,
I expect very soon to offer Mlle Albertine an even better one.’ I knew
that what was best able to annoy Françoise was that I should spend money
on people she did not like. She answered me by a few words rendered
almost unintelligible by a sudden breathlessness. When I later learned
that she had a heart condition, how remorseful I felt at never having
denied myself the ferocious and barren pleasure of answering her back in
this way! Françoise loathed Albertine, in any case, because Albertine,
being poor, could not add anything to what Françoise saw as my
advantages. She smiled benevolently each time I got an invitation from
Mme de Villeparisis. She was indignant in return that Albertine did not
practise reciprocity. I had reached the point of being forced to invent
purported presents I had received from her, in whose existence Françoise
placed not the faintest credence. This lack of reciprocity shocked her
above all in the matter of food. That Albertine should accept dinners
from Mama, if we had not been invited to Mme Bontemps’s (who was not,
however, in Paris for half the time, her husband accepting ‘posts’, as
in the old days when he had had enough of the Ministry), seemed to her
indelicate on the part of my loved one, whom she condemned indirectly by
reciting the saying current in Combray:

_Let’s eat my bread._

_– All right, come on._

– _Let’s eat yours instead._

– _My hunger’s gone_.

I made a pretence of being busy writing. ‘Who were you writing to?
Albertine said on entering – To a pretty friend of mine, to Gilberte
Swann. Do you know her? – No.’ I forbore to put any questions to
Albertine about her evening, I felt I would be reproaching her and,
given the hour, that we would no longer have time to be sufficiently
reconciled to move on to kisses and fondlings. So it was with these that
I wanted to begin, from the very first moment. Moreover, if I had calmed
down somewhat, I did not feel happy. The loss of one’s bearings, of all
sense of direction, that characterizes waiting, persists even after the
arrival of the person awaited, and, having taken the place in us of the
calm by virtue of which we had been picturing that arrival to ourselves
as so great a pleasure, prevents us from deriving any pleasure from it
at all. Albertine was here: my ravaged nerves, their agitation
continuing, were still waiting for her. ‘Can I have a nice one,
Albertine? – As many as you like,’ she said, all kindness. Never had I
seen her looking so pretty. ‘Another one? You know what great, great
pleasure it gives me. – And me ever so many times greater, she replied.
Oh, what a pretty slip-case you’ve got there – Take it, I give it to you
as a memento. – You’re so kind…’ We should be forever cured of our
romanticism were we willing, in order to think of the one we love, to
try to be the person we shall be once we no longer love them. The
slip-case, Gilberte’s agate marble, all that had once derived its
importance from a purely internal state, since now, for me, they were
just any old slip-case, any old marble.

I asked Albertine whether she wanted a drink. ‘I fancy I see some
oranges and some water over there, she said. That would be just the
thing.’ I was thus able to enjoy, along with her kisses, the coolness
that had seemed to me superior to them at the Princesse de Guermantes’s.
And squeezed now into the water, the orange seemed, as I drank, to yield
up the secret life of its ripening, of its fortunate action against
certain states of that human body which belongs to a very different
kingdom, which it is powerless to make live, but which in return it was
able to favour by its irrigatory effects, innumerable mysteries
disclosed by the fruit to my senses, not at all to my intellect.

Albertine having left, I recalled that I had promised Swann to write to
Gilberte and I thought it kinder to do so right away. It was without
emotion and as if adding the final line to some tedious piece of
classwork, that I traced on the envelope the name of Gilberte Swann,
with which in the old days I had covered my exercise-books so as to give
myself the illusion of corresponding with her. The fact is that if,
once, it had been I who wrote that name, the task had now been devolved
by habit on to one of the numerous secretaries on whom it can call. The
latter was able to write Gilberte’s name all the more calmly because,
found a place with me recently by habit, having recently entered my
employ, he had not known Gilberte and knew only, without putting any
reality underneath the words, because he had heard me speak of her, that
she was a girl with whom I had been in love.

I could not accuse her of being unfeeling. The person that I was now
with regard to her was the ‘witness’ best qualified to understand what
she herself had been. The slip-case and the agate marble had simply
become for me, with regard to Albertine, what they had been for
Gilberte, what they would have been for anyone who had not allowed the
glow from an inner flame to play on them. But now there was a new
agitation inside me which had impaired in its turn the true power of
words and things. And as Albertine was saying, to thank me once again:
‘I do so love turquoises!’, I replied: ‘Don’t let these ones die,’ thus
entrusting to them, as if to precious stones, the future of our
friendship, which, however, was no more capable of inspiring a sentiment
in Albertine than it had been of preserving that which had once united
me to Gilberte.

At this time there occurred a phenomenon which deserves mention only
because it is to be found in all significant periods of history. At the
very moment when I was writing to Gilberte, M. de Guermantes, only just
returned from the costume ball and still crowned by his helmet, was
reflecting that the following day he would certainly be obliged to go
into official mourning, and decided to bring forward by a week the cure
that he was due tο take. When he returned from it three weeks later (to
anticipate, since I have only just finished my letter to Gilberte), the
Duc’s friends, who had watched him, originally so indifferent, become a
fanatical anti-Dreyfusard, were left speechless with surprise when they
heard him reply (as if the cure had acted on more than just his
bladder): ‘Well, the proceedings will be reviewed and he’ll be
acquitted; you can’t condemn a man against whom there’s nothing. Have
you ever seen anyone as gaga as Froberville? An officer preparing
Frenchmen for the slaughter (for war, that is) ! Strange times!’ Now, in
the interim, the Duc de Guermantes had got to know three charming ladies
at the spa (an Italian princess and her two sisters-in-law). On hearing
them comment briefly on the books they were reading and on a play being
performed at the Casino, the Duc had at once realized that he was
dealing with women of superior intellect, and with whom, as he put it,
he could not keep up. He had been all the happier to be invited to play
bridge by the princess. But hard on his arrival there, as he was saying,
with all the fervour of his unqualified anti-Dreyfusism, ‘Well, there’s
no more talk of the famous Dreyfus getting his review,’ great had been
his stupefaction to hear the princess and her sister-in-law say: ‘We’ve
never been so close to it. You can’t keep someone in the penal colony
who hasn’t done anything. – Oh, ah, what?’ the Duc had stammered to
begin with, as if on discovering some bizarre nickname employed in this
household in order to make someone he had hitherto thought intelligent
appear ridiculous. But after a few days, just as, out of cowardice and a
spirit of imitation, we cry ‘Hallo there, Jojotte’,¹⁰⁰ without knowing
why, to a great artist we have heard being called that, in this house,
as yet much embarrassed by the new custom, the Duc was nevertheless
saying: ‘Indeed, if there’s nothing against him!’ The three charming
ladies considered he was not moving fast enough and were quite hard on
him: ‘But basically, no one of intelligence can have believed there was
anything.’ Each time a ‘crushing’ fact was produced against Dreyfus and
the Duc, believing that this was going to convert the three charming
ladies, came to announce it, they laughed uproariously and had no
difficulty in demonstrating to him, with great dialectical subtlety,
that the argument was without value and altogether ridiculous. The Duc
had returned to Paris a rabid Dreyfusard. And indeed we shall not
pretend that the three charming ladies were not, in this instance, the
harbingers of the truth. But it should be remarked that every ten years,
when you have left a man filled with a real conviction, it happens that
an intelligent couple, or simply one charming lady, enter his society
and that after a few months he has been led to hold opposite opinions.
And in this regard, there are many countries which behave like the man
of sincerity, many countries that have been left filled with hatred for
a people and which, six months later, have changed their views and
reversed their alliances.

I did not see Albertine again for some time, but continued, failing Mme
de Guermantes, who no longer spoke to my imagination, to see other
fairies and their dwellings, no more separable from them than the
mother-of-pearl or enamel valve, or the crenellated turret of its shell,
from the mollusc that manufactured it and finds shelter there. I would
not have known how to classify these ladies, the difficulty of the
problem being that, as well as lacking all significance, it was
impossible not only to resolve but to pose. Before the lady herself the
fairy _hôtel_ had to be approached. Now, one of them, ‘at home’ always
after lunch during the summer months, even before arriving there, you
had to have had the hood of the cab lowered, so fiercely was the sun
beating down, the memory of which, without my being aware of it, would
form part of the total impression. I thought I was simply going to the
cours-la-Reine;¹⁰¹ in reality, before arriving at the gathering, which a
practical man would perhaps have made fun of, I had, as though on a
journey across Italy, known both bedazzlement and extreme pleasure, from
which the house would never again be separated in my memory. Moreover,
because of the warmth of the season and of the time of day, the lady had
hermetically closed the shutters in the vast rectangular drawing-rooms
on the ground floor in which she entertained. I had difficulty at first
in recognizing my hostess and her visitors, even the Duchesse de
Guermantes, who, in her husky voice, asked me to go and sit beside her,
in a Beauvais armchair figuring the _Rape of Europa_.¹⁰² Then I made out
on the walls the vast eighteenth-century tapestries representing ships
with flowering hollyhocks for masts, beneath which I found myself in a
palace not of the Seine but of Neptune, beside the river Oceanus, where
the Duchesse de Guermantes had become like a divinity of the waters. I
should never finish were I to enumerate all the salons different from
this one. This example will suffice to demonstrate that into my
judgments of society I introduced poetic impressions, of which I never
took any account when drawing up the total, with the result that, when I
assessed a salon’s merits, my addition was never correct.

Admittedly, these sources of error were far from being the only ones,
but I no longer have time, before my departure for Balbec (where, to my
misfortune, I am going to stay for a second, which will also be the
last, time), to start on depictions of society that will find their
place much further on. Let me simply say that to this first false reason
(my relatively frivolous life, which gave people to assume that I was a
lover of society) for my letter to Gilberte and the return to the Swanns
that it seemed to indicate, Odette might have added, just as
inaccurately, a second. Up until now I have been imagining the different
aspects that society may take for the same person only by assuming that
society does not change: if the same lady who used not to know anyone is
now received everywhere, and another, who had a dominant position, has
been abandoned, we are tempted to see in this the purely personal ups
and downs that now and again lead, in the one society, consequent on
speculation on the Bourse, to a resounding bankruptcy or an unhoped-for
enrichment. But they are not only that. To a certain extent, social
manifestations (greatly inferior to artistic movements, to political
crises and to the evolution that carries public taste towards the
theatre of ideas, then towards Impressionist painting, then towards
complicated German music, then towards simple Russian music, or towards
social ideas, ideas of justice, religious reaction, an outburst of
patriotism) are nevertheless the distant, broken, uncertain, cloudy,
shifting reflection of them. So that even the salons cannot be portrayed
in the static immobility that may have been suitable hitherto for the
study of characters, which must also be as it were swept along in a
quasi-historical movement. The taste for novelty which leads those men
of the world more or less genuinely desirous of keeping abreast of
intellectual developments to frequent the circles where they can follow
them, will normally cause them to prefer some hostess, previously
unheard-of, who represents the still fresh hopes of a superior quality
of mind, so withered and faded among the women who have long held sway
over society, whose strengths and weaknesses they know and who no longer
speak to their imagination. Thus each age finds itself personified in
new women, in a new group of women, who, closely identified with the
very latest objects of curiosity, seem, by their dress, to appear only
now, at this moment, like an unknown species born of the last flood, the
irresistible beauties of each new Consulate, each new Directory.¹⁰³ But
very often the new hostesses are quite simply, like certain statesmen
whose first ministry it is but who had been knocking at all the doors
for the last forty years without seeing them open, women who were not
known to society but who had nevertheless, for a long time past and
_faute de mieux_, been receiving a ‘few close friends’. Admittedly, this
is not always the case, and when, with the prodigious efflorescence of
the Ballets Russes, revealing of, one after the other, Bakst, Nijinsky,
Benois, and the genius of Stravinsky, the Princess Yourbeletieff,¹⁰⁴ the
young godmother to all these new great men, appeared wearing on her head
an immense, quivering aigrette unfamiliar to the women of Paris and
which they all sought to copy, one might have thought that this
marvellous creature had been brought with them, in their innumerable
baggage and as their most precious treasure, by the Russian dancers; but
when, beside her, in her stage-box, we shall see installed, at every
performance of the ‘Russes’, like a veritable fairy, unknown before
today to the aristocracy, Mme Verdurin, we will be able to answer to
those members of society who easily suppose Mme Verdurin to be newly
disembarked with Diaghilev’s troupe, that this lady had already existed
in different times, and passed through various avatars, from which this
one differed only in being the first finally to bring her the success,
henceforth assured and progressing ever more rapidly, for which the
Patronne had waited for so long, and in vain. In the case of Mme Swann,
it is true, the novelty that she represented did not have the same
collective character. Her salon had crystallized around a man, a dying
man, who had passed almost overnight, at a time when his talent was
running dry, from obscurity to great fame. The infatuation with the
works of Bergotte was immense. He spent the whole day, on display, at
Mme Swann’s, who would whisper to a man of influence: ‘I’ll speak to
him, he’ll write you an article.’ He was, indeed, in a position to write
one, and even a short playlet for Mme Swann. Closer now to death, his
health was a little better than in the days when he came to ask after my
grandmother. The fact was that severe physical pain had imposed a
regimen on him. Illness is the best heeded of doctors: to kindness or to
knowledge, we only make promises; suffering we obey.

Certainly, the Verdurins’ little clan was currently an altogether
livelier source of interest than the mildly nationalist, even more
literary and above all Bergottian salon of Mme Swann. The little clan
was the active centre indeed of a long political crisis that had reached
its maximum intensity: Dreyfusism. But society people were for the most
part so anti-revisionist, that a Dreyfusian salon seemed something as
impossible as, in another age, a Communard salon.¹⁰⁵ The Princesse de
Caprarola, who had made the acquaintance of Mme Verdurin in connection
with a large exhibition she had been organizing, had indeed paid the
latter a lengthy visit, in hopes of debauching a few interesting
elements of the little clan and adding them to her own salon, a visit in
the course of which the Princesse (playing a cut-price version of the
Duchesse de Guermantes) had argued against received opinions and
declared those in her own world to be idiots, which Mme Verdurin had
thought showed great courage. But this courage was not to extend so far
later on as to dare, with the gaze of nationalist ladies trained on her,
to acknowledge Mme Verdurin at the Balbec races. In the case of Mme
Swann, on the other hand, the anti-Dreyfusards were grateful to her for
being a ‘_bien-pensante_’, which, married as she was to a Jew, was
doubly meritorious. Nonetheless, those who had never been there imagined
she entertained only a few obscure Israelites and pupils of Bergotte. So
it is that women far better qualified than Mme Swann are ranked at the
very bottom of the social scale, either on account of their origins, or
because they do not like dining out or the soirées at which they are
never seen, which is wrongly supposed to be due to their not having been
invited, or because they never talk about their friendships in society
but only about literature or art, or because people keep quiet about
having visited them, or they, so as not to show impoliteness to others,
keep quiet about having entertained them, in short for a thousand
reasons which end by making one or other of them, in the eyes of some,
the woman one does not receive. So it was with Odette. Mme d’Epinoy,
looking at the time for a contribution to the ‘Patrie française’,¹⁰⁶
having had to go and call on her, as if she were going into her
haberdasher’s, convinced moreover she would find only faces not despised
even but unknown, remained as if transfixed when the door opened, not on
the drawing-room she had imagined, but on a magic chamber in which, as
if thanks to a change of lighting in a fairy-play, she recognized in the
dazzling female extras, half reclining on divans or sitting on
armchairs, addressing their hostess by her first name, the Highnesses
and duchesses that she, the Princesse d’Epinoy, had the greatest
difficulty in luring to her own house, and to whom, at that moment,
beneath the benevolent gaze of Odette, the Marquis du Lau, the Comte
Louis de Turenne, the Prince Borghese and the Duc d’Estrées¹⁰⁷ were
acting as pantlers and as cup-bearers, carrying the orangeade and the
petits-fours. Since, without her being aware of it, the Princesse
d’Epinoy saw people’s place in society as internal to them, she was
obliged to disincarnate Mme Swann and reincarnate her in a fashionable
woman. Ignorance of the life actually led by women who do not exhibit it
in the newspapers thus casts a veil of mystery over the social standing
of some (thereby helping to diversify the salons). In Odette’s case, at
the outset, a few men of the very best society, curious to meet
Bergotte, had been to dine at her house privately. She had had the tact,
recently acquired, not to advertise the fact; there they had found – a
memory perhaps of the little nucleus whose traditions Odette had
preserved since the schism – the table laid, and so forth. Odette had
taken them, together with Bergotte, the death of whom this in fact
finally proved to be, to the interesting ‘first nights’. They spoke of
her to a few women of their own world capable of taking an interest in
all this novelty. They were convinced that Odette, an intimate of
Bergotte’s, had more or less collaborated in his works, and thought her
a thousand times more intelligent than the most remarkable women of the
Faubourg, for the same reason as they had placed all their political
hopes in certain staunch Republicans such as M. Doumer and M.
Deschanel,¹⁰⁸ whereas they would have seen France as headed for the
abyss had it been entrusted to the monarchist personnel whom they
entertained to dinner, to the Charettes, the Doudeauvilles, etc.¹⁰⁹ This
change in Odette’s standing had been achieved on her part with a
discretion that made it surer and more rapid, but allowed no inkling of
it to reach a public inclined to depend on the columns of _Le Gaulois_
for the advance or decline of a salon, with the result that one day, at
the dress rehearsal of a play by Bergotte, given in one of the most
fashionable auditoria in aid of charity, it was a veritable _coup de
théâtre_ when they saw, in the front box, which was that of the author,
coming to sit next to Mme Swann, Mme de Marsantes and the woman who,
thanks to the progressive effacement of the Duchesse de Guermantes
(sated with honours, and annihilating herself by putting up no
resistance), was on the way to becoming the ‘lioness’, the queen of the
hour, the Comtesse Molé. ‘We hadn’t even suspected she’d started to
climb,’ it was said of Odette just as the Comtesse Molé was seen
entering her box, ‘and now she’s reached the top rung.’ With the result
that Mme Swann was able to believe I was making it up with her daughter
out of snobbery. Despite her brilliant woman friends, Odette
nevertheless listened to the play with an extreme attentiveness, as
though she were there purely in order to hear it, just as in the old
days she had crossed the Bois for her health’s sake and to get some
exercise. Men who, in the old days, had paid her less attention came to
the balcony, disturbing all and sundry, so as to hang on her hand and
come close to the imposing circle by whom she was surrounded. She, with
a smile still more friendly than ironic, replied patiently to their
questions, affecting a greater calm than one would have credited and
which was perhaps genuine, this exhibition being only the belated
exhibition of a habitual and discreetly concealed intimacy. Behind the
three ladies attracting all the stares was Bergotte, surrounded by the
Prince d’Agrigente, the Comte Louis de Turenne and the Marquis de
Bréauté. And it is easy to understand that, for men who were received
everywhere and could no longer expect further elevation save by seeking
out originality, this demonstration of their worth that they thought to
be giving, by allowing themselves to be lured by a hostess known for her
high intellectuality, in whose company they expected to meet all the
playwrights and novelists who were in vogue, was livelier and more
exciting than the soirées at the Princesse de Guermantes’s, which,
lacking any programme or fresh attraction, had succeeded one another
these many years past, more or less similar to that which we have
described at such length. In this exalted world of the Guermantes, from
which curiosity had somewhat turned away, the new intellectual fashions
were not embodied in amusements in their own image, as in the skits
written for Mme Swann by Bergotte, or those veritable meetings of the
Committee of Public Safety¹¹⁰ (had society been able to take an interest
in the Dreyfus Affair) when there gathered at Mme Verdurin’s, Picquart,
Clemenceau, Zola, Reinach and Labori.¹¹¹

Gilberte, too, was of service to her mother’s position, for an uncle of
Swann’s had just left the girl nearly eighty million francs, which meant
that the Faubourg Saint-Germain was beginning to take notice of her. The
obverse of which medal was that Swann, who was anyway dying, held
Dreyfusist views, but even this did his wife no harm and was even of
service to her. It did her no harm because they said: ‘He’s senile, an
idiot, no one pays him any attention, only his wife counts and she’s
charming.’ But even Swann’s Dreyfusism was useful to Odette. Left to her
own devices, she would perhaps have gone and made overtures to smart
women that would have destroyed her. Whereas, on the evenings when she
dragged her husband out to dine in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, Swann,
remaining unsociably in his corner, did not hesitate, should he see
Odette getting herself introduced to some nationalist lady, to say in a
loud voice: ‘Come, Odette, you’re mad. Calm down, I beg you. It would be
ignominious on your part to get yourself introduced to anti-Semites. I
forbid it.’ The society people after whom everyone runs are unaccustomed
either to so much pride or to such lack of breeding. For the first time
they had found someone who thought himself ‘more’ than them. These
grumbles of Swann’s were retailed and Odette was showered with
turned-down visiting cards. When she called on Mme d’Arpajon, there was
a keen and sympathetic stir of curiosity. ‘It didn’t annoy you my
introducing her to you, said Mme d’Arpajon. She’s very nice. I got to
know her through Marie de Marsantes. – No, no, on the contrary, it seems
she’s as intelligent as could be, she’s charming. On the contrary, I
longed to meet her; tell me where she lives.’ Mme d’Arpajon told Mme
Swann that she had enjoyed herself greatly at her house two days before
and had been delighted to give up Mme de Saint-Euverte for her sake.
Which was true, for to prefer Mme Swann was to prove that you were
intelligent, like going to the concert rather than a tea-party. But when
Mme de Saint-Euverte came to Mme d’Arpajon’s at the same time as Odette,
since Mme de Saint-Euverte was a great snob and Mme d’Arpajon, even
though she rather looked down on her, was keen on her receptions, Mme
d’Arpajon did not introduce Odette so that Mme de Saint-Euverte should
not know who it was. The Marquise imagined that it must be some princess
or other who very seldom went out for her never to have seen her, and
prolonged her visit, replying indirectly to what Odette said, but Mme
d’Arpajon was unyielding. And when the defeated Mme de Saint-Euverte was
leaving: ‘I didn’t introduce you, her hostess said to Odette, because
people don’t much like going to her and she invites on the grand scale;
you wouldn’t have been able to extricate yourself. – Oh, that doesn’t
matter,’ said Odette, with some regret. But she retained the idea that
people did not like going to Mme de Saint-Euverte’s, which was to a
certain extent true, and concluded from that that her own standing was
much superior to that of Mme de Saint-Euverte, even though the latter
had a very grand standing and Odette as yet none at all.

She was unaware of this, and although all Mme de Guermantes’s woman
friends were friendly also with Mme d’Arpajon, when the latter invited
Mme Swann, Odette would say, with a scrupulous air: ‘I’m going to Mme
d’Arpajon’s, but you’re going to think me very _vieux jeu_, it shocks
me, on account of Mme de Guermantes’ (whom she did not as it happens
know). Men of distinction thought that the fact that Mme Swann knew few
people in high society was because she must be a superior woman,
probably a great musician, and that to go there would be a sort of
extra-social qualification, as for a duke to be a Doctor of Science.
Women who were complete nobodies were drawn to Odette for a contrary
reason; learning that she went to the Colonne concerts¹¹² and declared
herself to be a Wagnerian, they concluded that she must be a ‘practical
joker’ and were much excited by the thought of getting to know her. But,
being themselves none too secure socially, they were afraid of
compromising themselves in public by seeming to be friendly with Odette,
and, should they catch sight of Mme Swann at a charity concert, they
looked the other way, deeming it out of the question, under the gaze of
Mme de Rochechouart, to acknowledge a woman who was quite capable of
having been to Bayreuth – which meant of committing all manner of
excess.

Everyone, when they visited someone else, became different. To say
nothing of the miraculous metamorphoses achieved in this way among the
fairies, in Mme Swann’s drawing-room, M. de Bréauté, lent a sudden
prominence by the absence of the people who customarily surrounded him,
by the air of satisfaction he wore at finding himself as much at ease
there as if, instead of going to a party, he had donned his spectacles
in order to shut himself away and read the _Revue des Deux-Mondes_,¹¹³
and by the mysterious ritual he appeared to be fulfilling by coming to
see Odette, M. de Bréauté himself seemed like a new man. I would have
given a lot to see how much the Duchesse de Montmorency-Luxembourg might
have changed for the worse in this new setting. But she was one of those
people to whom Odette could never be introduced. Mme de Montmorency, who
was much more kindly disposed towards Oriane than the latter was towards
her, had greatly astonished me by saying to me, apropos of Mme de
Guermantes: ‘She knows clever people, everyone likes her, I think that
if she’d stuck at it more, she’d have managed to create a salon. The
truth is she wasn’t keen on it, she’s quite right, she’s happy as she
is, sought after by all.’ If Mme de Guermantes did not have a ‘salon’,
what then was a ‘salon’?

The stupefaction into which these words threw me was no greater than
that which I caused Mme de Guermantes by telling her I much liked going
to Mme de Montmorency’s. Oriane thought her an old cretin. ‘Me, yes, she
said, I’m forced to, she’s my aunt; but you! She doesn’t even know how
to attract agreeable people.’ Mme de Guermantes did not realize that the
agreeable people left me cold, that when she said ‘the Arpajon salon’ I
saw a yellow butterfly, and ‘the Swann salon’ (Mme Swann was ‘at home’
in the winter from 6 till 7) a black butterfly, its wings felted with
snow. Although inaccessible to her, she adjudged this latter salon,
which was not one, to be excusable in my own case, because of the
‘clever people’. But Mme de Luxembourg! Had I already ‘produced’
something that had been noticed, she would have concluded that talent
may co-exist with an element of snobbery. And to crown her
disappointment, I admitted to her that I did not go to Mme de
Montmorency’s (as she thought) to ‘take notes’ or ‘make a study’. Mme de
Guermantes was no more mistaken, however, than those society novelists
who analyse the actions of a snob, or a purported such, cruelly from the
outside, but never place themselves inside him, at the time when a whole
social springtime is coming into flower in his imagination. When I tried
to find what the great pleasure was that I felt on going to Mme de
Montmorency’s, I was myself somewhat disappointed. She lived in an old
place in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, filled with detached houses divided
by small gardens. Under the archway, a statuette, said to be by
Falconet,¹¹⁴ represented a spring, from which, indeed, there welled a
perpetual moisture. A little further on, the concierge, her eyes
permanently red, whether from grief, or neurasthenia, or a migraine, or
a cold, never answered you, but gestured vaguely to indicate that the
Duchesse was in and allowed a few drops to fall from her eyelids over a
bowl filled with ‘forget-me-nots’. The pleasure I got from seeing the
statuette, putting me in mind as it did of a small plaster gardener that
had stood in a garden in Combray, was as nothing compared with that
produced in me by the great, damp, resonant staircase, full of echoes,
like that in certain bathing establishments of old, from the vases
filled with cinerarias – blue against blue – in the anteroom, and above
all from the tinkling of the bell, which exactly matched that in
Eulalie’s room. This tinkling raised my enthusiasm to new heights, but
seemed too humble for me to be able to explain it to Mme de Montmorency,
so that that lady always saw me in a state of euphoria whose source she
never divined.


THE INTERMITTENCES OF THE HEART ¹¹⁵

My second arrival in Balbec was very different from the first. The
manager had come in person to wait for me at Pont-Couleuvre, repeating
how much he valued his titled clientèle, which made me fear that he had
ennobled me until I realized that in the darkness of his grammatical
memory, _titré_, or ‘titled’, meant simply _attitré_, or ‘regular’. For
the rest, as he proceeded to learn new languages, he grew worse at the
old ones. He announced that he had put me right at the top of the hotel.
‘I hope, he said, that you won’t see that as a lack of discourtesy, I
was worried about giving you a room you’re unworthy of, but I did it
with regard to the noise, because that way you won’t have anyone
overhead assailing your eardrops (for “eardrums”). Rest assured, I’ll
have the windows closed so they don’t bang. I’m intolerable where that’s
concerned,’ (these words expressing not his own thought, which was that
he would always be found inexorable on that subject, but very possibly
that of his _garçons d’étage_). The rooms were in any case those of my
first stay. They were no lower down but I had risen in the manager’s
esteem. I could have a fire lit if I liked (for on doctors’ orders I had
left straight after Easter), but he was afraid there might be ‘crocks’
(for ‘cracks’) in the ceiling. ‘Above all, always wait when lighting a
blaze until the one before’s been consummated (for “consumed”). For the
important thing’s to avoid not setting fire to the fireplace, all the
more because, to brighten things up a bit, I’ve had a big old Chinese
porcelain postiche placed above it, which might get ruined.’

He informed me with much sadness of the death of the _bâtonnier_¹¹⁶ from
Cherbourg: ‘He was a woolly one,’ he said (probably for ‘wily’), and
gave me to understand that his end had been hastened by a life of
‘débâcles’, which meant ‘debauchery’. ‘I’d been noticing for some time
how after dinner he used to have a sneeze (no doubt for a “snooze”) in
the lounge. Just lately, he was so much altered that if you hadn’t known
it was him, to look at he was barely recognisant’ (for ‘recognizable’,
no doubt).

In happy compensation, the First President¹¹⁷ from Caen had just
received the ‘ensign’ of a Commander in the Légion d’Honneur. ‘He has
abilities, that’s for sure, but it seems he was given it above all on
account of his great impotence.’ Much had been made of this award
moreover in the previous day’s _Écho de Paris_,¹¹⁸ of which the manager
had as yet read only the first ‘paraph’ (for ‘paragraph’). M.
Caillaux’s¹¹⁹ policies had been given a good going-over there. ‘I think
they’re right, what’s more, he said. He’s putting us too much under the
thimble (instead of the “thumb”) ¹²⁰ of Germany.’ Since this sort of
topic as treated by a hotelier struck me as tedious, I stopped
listening. I thought of the mental images that had decided me to return
to Balbec. They were very different from those of the other time, the
vision that I had come in search of was as brilliant as the earlier one
had been hazy; they were to be no less of a disappointment. The images
chosen by memory are as arbitrary, as confined and as elusive as those
which imagination had formed and that reality had destroyed. There is no
reason why, outside of us, a real place should possess the pictures
painted by memory rather than those of our dreams. Besides, a new
reality will perhaps make us forget, or even detest, the desires on
whose account we had come away.

Those which had made me come away to Balbec stemmed in part from the
fact that the Verdurins (of whose invitations I had never taken
advantage, and who would certainly be glad to entertain me, were I to go
to the country to apologize for never having been able to visit them in
Paris), knowing that several of the faithful would be spending their
holidays along this coast, and having for that reason rented for the
whole season one of M. de Cambremer’s châteaux (La Raspelière), had
invited Mme Putbus. On the evening when I had learned of this (in
Paris), I sent, like a veritable madman, our young footman to inquire
whether that lady would be taking her lady’s-maid to Balbec. It was
eleven o’clock at night. The concierge was a long time opening up and by
some miracle did not send my messenger packing, nor summon the police,
but was content merely to give him a rough reception, while supplying
him with the desired information. He said that the head lady’s-maid
would indeed be accompanying her mistress, first of all to take the
waters in Germany, then to Biarritz, and lastly, to Mme Verdurin’s. From
that moment on, I had felt calm and glad to have this prospect in store.
I had been able to dispense with those pursuits in the street, when I
was not armed with the letter of introduction to the beauties I
encountered that my having dined that same evening, at the Verdurins,
with her mistress, would represent to the ‘Giorgione’. Moreover, she
would perhaps think even better of me on learning that I knew not only
the bourgeois tenants of La Raspelière, but its owners, and especially
Saint-Loup, who, unable to recommend me to the lady’s-maid from a
distance (she not knowing Robert’s name), had written an enthusiastic
letter to the Cambremers on my behalf. He thought that, aside from the
great usefulness they might have for me, I would find Mme de Cambremer,
the daughter-in-law, _née_ Legrandin, interesting to talk to. ‘She’s an
intelligent woman, he had assured me. Within limits, of course. She
won’t say anything definitive (“definitive” things had taken the place
of “sublime” ones with Robert, who, every five or six years, would
modify some of his pet expressions, while preserving the main ones), but
she’s got character, she has a personality, intuition, she comes out
with just what needs saying. She can get on your nerves now and again,
she throws out silly remarks so as to seem “upper crust”, which is all
the more ridiculous since no one could be less fashionable than the
Cambremers, she isn’t always “up to the minute” but, all in all, she’s
still one of the people it’s most bearable to associate with.’

As soon as Robert’s recommendation had reached them, the Cambremers,
whether snobbery, which led them to want to make themselves indirectly
agreeable to Saint-Loup, or gratitude for what he had done for one of
their nephews in Doncières, or more probably mainly out of kindness and
a tradition of hospitality, had written long letters demanding that I
should stay with them, or, if I preferred to be more independent,
offering to look for lodgings. When Saint-Loup had pointed out that I
would be staying at the Grand-Hôtel in Balbec, they replied that they
would at least expect a visit from me straight after I arrived and, if
it were too long delayed, would not fail to come and badger me with
invitations to their _garden-parties_.

Nothing of course connected Mme Putbus’s lady’s-maid in any essential
way to the neighbourhood of Balbec; she would not be for me there like
the peasant girl whom, alone on the Méséglise road, I had so often
summoned up in vain, with all the strength of my longing.

But I had long since ceased trying to extract from a woman the square
root of her unknown as it were, which did not often survive a simple
introduction. At least in Balbec, where I had not been for a long time,
I should have the advantage, for want of the necessary connection that
did not exist between the neighbourhood and the woman, that my sense of
reality would not be suppressed for me by habit as it was in Paris
where, whether in my own house, or in some familiar bedroom, pleasure
with a woman was unable to give me for a single moment the illusion, in
the midst of everyday objects, that it was opening the way for me to a
new life. (For if habit is a second nature, it prevents us from knowing
the first, of which it has neither the cruelties nor the enchantments.)
But I would perhaps have this illusion in a new landscape, where, before
a ray of sunlight, the sensibility is reborn, and where the lady’s-maid
whom I desired would indeed finally inflame me; but we shall see
circumstances so decree not only that this woman should not come to
Balbec, but that I dreaded nothing so much as that she might come, with
the result that this principal object of my journey was neither attained
nor even pursued. True, Mme Putbus was not due to go to the Verdurins so
early in the season; but the pleasures that we have chosen can be a long
way off if their advent is certain and if, while we await them, we can
give ourselves over in the meantime to an idle seeking to attract and to
an incapacity for love. For the rest, I was not going to Balbec in as
impractical a spirit as the first time; there is always less egotism in
the pure imagination than in the memory; and I knew that I was going to
find myself as it happens in one of those places teeming with beautiful
women whom I did not know; a seaside resort displays no fewer of them
than a ball, and I thought in advance of those strolls in front of the
hotel, along the esplanade, with the same sort of pleasure that Mme de
Guermantes would have procured for me if, instead of getting me invited
to brilliant dinner-parties, she had more often given my name, for their
lists of male partners, to the hostesses where there was dancing. To
make female acquaintances in Balbec would be as easy as it had been
awkward for me in the old days, for I now had as many connections and
supports there as I had been devoid of them on my first trip.

I was aroused from my reverie by the voice of the manager, to whose
political dissertation I had not been listening. Changing the subject,
he told me of the delight of the First President on learning of my
arrival and that he would be coming to call on me in my room, that very
evening. The prospect of this visit so alarmed me, for I was starting to
feel tired, that I begged him to obstruct it (which he promised to do)
and, for added security, for this first evening, to get his staff to
mount guard on my floor. He did not seem overfond of them. ‘I’m obliged
all the time to run after them because they lack too much inertia. If I
wasn’t there, they wouldn’t budge. I’ll put the liftboy on sentry-go at
your door.’ I asked whether he was at last ‘head _chasseur_’. ‘He’s not
yet senior enough in the house, he replied. He’s got workmates older
than him, there’d be an outcry. There need to be granulations in
everything. I allow he has a good aptitude (for “attitude”) there in
front of his lift. But he’s still a bit young for such positions. It
would show up against others, who are too old. He’s a bit lacking in
responsibility, which is the primitive quality (no doubt the
“primordial”, the most important, quality). He needs to have his brains
(my interlocutor meant “head”) screwed on a bit more. Anyway, he need
only trust me. I know the ropes. Before winning my stripes as manager of
the Grand-Hôtel, I first saw action under M. Paillard.’¹²¹ This
comparison impressed me and I thanked the manager for having come
himself all the way to Pont-à-Couleuvre. ‘Oh, don’t mention it! It made
me waste only an infinite (for “infinitesimal”) amount of time.’ We had
in any event arrived.

A convulsion of my entire being. On the very first night, as I was
suffering from an attack of cardiac fatigue, trying to overcome the
pain, I bent down slowly and cautiously to remove my boots. But hardly
had I touched the first button of my bottine, before my chest swelled,
filled with an unknown, divine presence, I was shaken by sobs, tears
streamed from my eyes. The person who had come to my assistance, who was
rescuing me from my aridity of soul, was the one who, several years
before, at an identical moment of distress and loneliness, a moment when
I no longer had anything of myself, had entered, and who had restored me
to myself, for it was both me and more than me (the container which is
more than the content, and had brought it to me). I had just glimpsed,
in my memory, bent over my fatigue, the tender, concerned, disappointed
face of my grandmother, such as she had been on that first evening of
our arrival; the face of my grandmother, not that of the one whom I had
been surprised and self-reproachful at having missed so little, who had
nothing of her but her name, but of my true grandmother, the living
reality of whom, for the first time since the Champs-Elysées, where she
had suffered her stroke, I had rediscovered in a complete and
involuntary memory. This reality does not exist for us until such time
as it has been recreated in our minds (otherwise the men who have been
involved in some titanic battle would all be great epic poets); thus, in
a wild desire to hurl myself into her arms, it was only at this instant
– more than a year after her funeral, on account of the anachronism
which so often prevents the calendar of facts from coinciding with that
of our feelings – that I had just learned she was dead. I had spoken of
her often since that time and thought of her also, but beneath the words
and thoughts of an ungrateful, selfish and cruel young man there had
never been anything that might resemble my grandmother, for, in my
frivolity, my love of pleasure, and accustomed as I was to seeing her as
an invalid, I contained within me the memory of what she had been only
in a virtual state. At whatever moment we may consider it, our total
soul has an almost fictitious value only, for all its great wealth of
assets, for now some, and now others of these are unavailable, whether
indeed they be real assets, as well as those of the imagination, and in
my own case, for example, fully as much as that of the ancient name of
Guermantes, those, so very much more solemn, of the true memory of my
grandmother. For to the disturbances of memory are linked the
intermittences of the heart. It is no doubt the existence of our body,
similar for us to a vase in which our spirituality is enclosed, which
induces us to suppose that all our inner goods, our past joys, all our
sorrows, are perpetually in our possession. Perhaps this is as
inaccurate as to believe that they escape or return. At all events, if
they do remain inside us, it is for most of the time in an unknown
domain where they are of no service to us, and where even the most
ordinary of them are repressed by memories of a different order, which
exclude all simultaneity with them in our consciousness. But if the
framework of sensations in which they are preserved be recaptured, they
have in their turn the same capacity to expel all that is incompatible
with them, to install in us, on its own, the self that experienced them.
Now, since the self that I had suddenly re-become had not existed since
that far-off evening when my grandmother had undressed me on my arrival
in Balbec, it was quite naturally, not after the day we were living, of
which that self knew nothing, but – as if there were, in time, different
and parallel series – without any break in continuity, immediately after
that first evening in the past, that I adhered to the moment when my
grandmother had leaned towards me. The self that I was then and which
had vanished all that time ago, was once again so close to me that I
seemed to hear still the words that had come immediately before, yet
which were no more than a dream, just as a man not properly awake thinks
he can perceive close beside him the sounds of his receding dream. I was
nothing more than the being who had sought refuge in his grandmother’s
arms, to erase the traces of her sorrows by giving her kisses, the being
I would have had as great difficulty in imagining to myself, when I was
one or other of those who had been succeeding one another inside me for
some time past, as the efforts it would now have required, sterile in
any case, to re-experience the desires and joys of one of those beings
that, for a time at least, I no longer was. I recalled how, an hour
before the moment when my grandmother had thus leaned over, in her
dressing-gown, towards my boots, wandering in the stiflingly hot street,
in front of the _pâtissier_, I had thought I could never, such was the
need I had to embrace her, wait for the hour I had still to spend
without her. And now that this same need was reborn, I knew that I could
wait for hour upon hour, that never again would she be beside me, I had
made the discovery only now because I had just, on being aware of her
for the first time, alive, real, swelling my heart to bursting, on
meeting her again that is, realized that I had lost her for ever. Lost
for ever; I could not understand and I applied myself to suffering the
pain of this contradiction: on the one hand, an existence, a tenderness,
surviving in me such as I had known them, that is to say created for me,
a love in which everything so much found in me its complement, its
object, its constant direction, that the genius of great men, all the
geniuses who may have existed since the world began, would have counted
for less with my grandmother than a single one of my faults; and on the
other hand, as soon as I had relived, as though present, that felicity,
to feel it traversed by the certainty, springing up like a repeated
physical pain, of a nothingness that had erased my image of that
tenderness, which had destroyed that existence, abolished
retrospectively our mutual predestination, made of my grandmother, at
the moment when I had found her again as if in a mirror, a mere stranger
whom chance had led to spend a few years with me, as it might have been
with anyone at all, but for whom, before and after, I was nothing, would
be nothing.

Instead of the pleasures I had been enjoying for some time past, the
only pleasure it would have been possible for me to enjoy at this moment
would have been, by retouching the past, to lessen the sorrows my
grandmother had once experienced. I did not remember her only in that
dressing-gown, a garment appropriate, to the extent of becoming almost
symbolic of them, to the pains, unhealthy no doubt yet comforting also,
she took on my behalf; little by little, I now remembered all the
opportunities I had seized, by letting her see my sufferings, by, if
need be, exaggerating them, of causing her a grief that I then imagined
being expunged by my kisses, as if my affection were as capable as was
my happiness of making hers; and what was worse, I, who could conceive
of no other happiness now than of being able to find it once again
extended in my memory across the planes of that face, moulded and bowed
by tenderness, I had once shown a senseless fury in trying to extirpate
from it even the smallest pleasures, as on the day when Saint-Loup had
taken my grandmother’s photograph and when, finding it hard to conceal
from her the almost ridiculously childish coquettishness she was putting
into posing, with her broad-brimmed hat, in a fetching half-light, I had
allowed myself to murmur a few impatient and hurtful words, which, I had
sensed from the way her face contracted, had struck home, had wounded
her; it was me whom they were lacerating now that the consolation of a
thousand kisses was forever impossible.

But never again would I be able to erase that contraction from her face,
or that suffering from her heart, or rather from my own; for since the
dead exist only in us, it is ourselves that we strike unrelentingly when
we persist in remembering the blows we have dealt them. I clung to these
sorrows, however cruel they might be, with all my strength, for I felt
indeed that they were the effect of my memory of my grandmother, the
proof that this memory which I had was indeed present in me. I felt that
I truly remembered her only through sorrow, and would have wished the
nails to be driven yet more firmly home that had riveted her memory
inside me. I had not sought to make the suffering any easier, to
embellish it, to pretend that my grandmother was only absent and
momentarily invisible, by addressing words and entreaties to her
photograph (the one that Saint-Loup had taken and which I had with me)
as though to a being separated from us but who, having remained an
individual, knows us and remains joined to us by an indissoluble
harmony. I never did this, for I was anxious not to suffer only, but to
respect the originality of my suffering such as I had suddenly endured
it against my will, and I wanted to continue to endure it, in accordance
with its own laws, each time this strange contradiction between survival
and oblivion, intersecting within me, returned. I knew, not, certainly,
whether I might one day isolate some element of truth in this painful
and at present incomprehensible impression, but that, if I were ever
able to extract that element of truth, it could only be from this same
impression, so particular, so spontaneous, which had been neither traced
by my intellect, nor inflected or attenuated by my pusillanimity, but
which death itself, the abrupt revelation of death, had hollowed out in
me, like a thunderbolt, in accordance with some inhuman, supernatural
diagram, like a double and mysterious furrow. (As for the forgetfulness
of my grandmother in which I had been living up until now, I could not
even think of attaching myself to that so as to draw some truth from it;
for in itself it was nothing more than a negation, an enfeeblement of
the mind, incapable of re-creating an actual moment of life and obliged
to substitute for it conventional and indifferent mental images.)
Perhaps, however, now that the instinct for self-preservation, or the
intellect’s ingenuity in shielding us against sorrow, was beginning to
build on the still smoking ruins, to lay the first foundations of its
useful but ill-starred building-work, I had been finding too much
comfort in recalling one or other of the beloved being’s judgments, in
recalling them as if she were still able to pass them, as if she
existed, as if I continued to exist for her. But as soon as I came to
fall asleep, at that more truthful hour when my eyes were closed to the
things without, the world of sleep (on the threshold of which, my
intellect and my will, momentarily paralysed, could no longer contend
with the cruelty of my genuine impressions) reflected, refracted the
painful synthesis of survival and nothingness, in the organic depths,
now become translucid, of the mysteriously illuminated viscera. World of
sleep, where our inner knowledge, held in subjection by the disturbances
in our organs, quickens the rhythm of our heart or of our breathing, for
the same dosage of alarm, of sadness, of remorse, is a hundred times
more potent when thus injected into our veins; as soon as, in order to
travel along the arteries of the subterranean city, we have embarked on
the dark waves of our own blood, as if on the sixfold meanders of some
internal Lethe,¹²² tall, solemn forms appear to us, accost us and then
go from us, leaving us in tears. I searched in vain for that of my
grandmother the moment I touched land beneath the gloomy porticos; yet I
knew she existed still, but with a diminished life, as pale as that of
memory; the darkness was increasing, and the wind; my father did not
come, who was to conduct me to her. Suddenly my breath failed, I felt my
heart as if hardened, I had just remembered that for long weeks I had
forgotten to write to my grandmother. What must she be thinking of me?
‘Dear God, I said to myself, how unhappy she must be in that small room
that they’ve rented for her, as small as for some former maidservant,
where she’s all alone with the nurse they’ve sent in to look after her,
and where she can’t stir, for she’s still partly paralysed and hasn’t
once wanted to get up! She must think I’ve forgotten her since she died,
how alone and abandoned she must feel! Oh! I must run and see her, this
very minute, I can’t wait for my father to come, but where is it? How
can I have forgotten the address? If only she still recognizes me! How
can I have forgotten her all these months?’ It’s dark, I shan’t find
her, the wind is stopping me advancing; but here is my father walking in
front of me; I cry out to him: ‘Where’s grandmother? Tell me the
address. Is she all right? Is it quite certain she’s got all she needs?
– No, no, my father says to me, you can rest assured. Her nurse is an
orderly person. We send a very small sum from time to time so they can
buy her the little she has need of. She sometimes asks what’s become of
you. She’s even been told you were going to write a book. She seemed
pleased. She wiped away a tear.’ Then I thought I remembered that
shortly after she died, my grandmother had said to me, sobbing, with a
humble expression, like an old servant who has been dismissed, like a
stranger: ‘You’ll allow me to see you sometimes all the same, don’t let
me go too many years without visiting me. Remember that you were my
grandson and that grandmothers don’t forget.’ And seeing once again the
face, so submissive, so unhappy, so gentle, that she wore, I wanted to
run immediately and say what I ought then to have replied to her: ‘But
grandmother, you’ll see me as much as you want, I have only you in the
world, I shall never leave you again.’ How my silence must have made her
sob during all these months when I haven’t been to where she’s in bed!
What may she have said to herself? And it was sobbing that I, too, said
to my father: ‘Quick, quick, her address, take me.’ But he: ‘The fact
is… I don’t know if you’ll be able to see her. Besides, she’s very weak,
you know, very weak, she’s not herself any more, I think you’d find it
rather upsetting. And I don’t recall the exact number in the avenue. –
But tell me, you who know, it’s not true that the dead are no longer
alive. It just can’t be true, despite what they say, since grandmother
still exists.’ My father gave a sad smile: ‘Oh, very little, you know,
very little. I think you’d do better not to go. She lacks for nothing.
They come and keep everything tidy. – But she’s often alone? – Yes, but
that’s better for her. It’s better that she shouldn’t think, that could
only cause her pain. Thinking often causes people pain. Anyway, you
know, she’s very low. I’ll leave you exact directions so that you can go
there; I can’t see what you’d be able to do and I don’t think the nurse
would let you see her. – You know very well though that I shall always
live near her, stags, stags, Francis Jammes, fork.’¹²³ But already I had
recrossed the river with its gloomy meanders, I had come back to the
surface, where the world of the living opens out; so if I was still
repeating ‘Francis Jammes, stags, stags’, this sequence of words no
longer held the limpid, logical meaning they had expressed so naturally
for me only a moment before and which I could no longer recall. I could
no longer understand even why the word Aias,¹²⁴ spoken to me just now by
my father, had at once signified ‘Take care not to catch cold,’ beyond
any possible doubt. I had forgotten to close the shutters and the broad
daylight had no doubt woken me up. But I could not bear to look out on
those waves that my grandmother had once been able to contemplate for
hours on end; the new image of their indifferent beauty was at once
completed by the idea that she could not see them; I would have liked to
block my ears against their sound, for now the luminous plenitude of the
beach was hollowing out a void in my heart; everything seemed to be
saying to me, like the paths and the lawns in the public gardens where I
had once lost her, when I was very young: ‘We haven’t seen her,’ and
beneath the roundness of the pale, heavenly sky I felt oppressed, as if
beneath an immense blue bell-jar, shutting off a horizon where my
grandmother was not. So as no longer to see, I turned towards the wall,
but alas, against me was the partition that had served of old between us
as a morning messenger, that partition which, docile as a violin in
rendering all the nuances of a feeling, spoke so exactly to my
grandmother of my fear both of waking her up, or, if she was already
awake, of not being heard by her and of her not daring to move, then at
once, like a second instrument taking it up, announcing her coming and
exhorting me to stay calm. I no more dared to approach that partition
than a piano on which my grandmother had been playing and that was
vibrating still from her touch. I knew that now I could knock, more
loudly even, that nothing could again wake her, that I would not hear
any response, that my grandmother would never again come. And I asked
nothing more of God, if there is a Paradise, than to be able to give
there the three little taps on that partition that my grandmother would
recognize anywhere, and to which she would respond with those other taps
that meant: ‘Don’t fret yourself, little mouse, I realize you’re
impatient, but I’m just coming’, and that he should let me remain with
her for all eternity, which would not be too long for the two of us.

The manager came to ask me whether I did not want to go down. Just in
case, he had taken care of my ‘placement’ in the dining-room. Not having
seen me, he had been afraid that I might have had a recurrence of my
breathless attacks from the old days. He hoped that it would be only
some minor ‘throat troubles’ and assured me that he had heard they could
be eased with the aid of what he called ‘calyptus’.

He handed me a brief note from Albertine. She had not been due to come
to Balbec this year but, having changed her plans, had been for the last
three days, not in Balbec itself, but ten minutes away by tram, at a
neighbouring resort. Afraid that I might be tired from the journey, she
had stayed away on the first evening, but was now sending to know when I
might be able to see her. I inquired whether she had come in person, not
so as to see her, but so as to arrange not to see her. ‘She did indeed,
the manager replied. But she’d like it to be as soon as possible, unless
you have absolutely necessitous reasons. You can see, he concluded,
that, when all’s done and said, everyone here wants you.’ I, however,
did not want to see anyone.

Yet the day before, when I arrived, I had felt captured once more by the
indolent charm of life in a seaside resort. The same silent ‘lift’, out
of respect this time, not disdain, and flushed with pleasure, had set
the lift in motion. And as I rose along the ascending column, I
traversed once more what had once been for me the mystery of an
unfamiliar hotel, where, when you arrive, a tourist without either
protection or prestige, every habitué returning to his room, every young
girl going down to dinner, every maid passing down the strangely
configured corridors, and the girl come from America with her chaperon
going down to dinner, give you a look in which you can read nothing of
what you would have wished for. This time, on the contrary, I had
experienced the too restful pleasure of making the ascent of a hotel
known to me, where I felt at home, where I had once more accomplished
that operation having always to be begun afresh, longer and more
difficult than the turning inside-out of an eyelid, which consists of
imposing on objects the soul that is familiar to us in place of their
own soul, which had alarmed us. Would I now, I had said to myself,
unsuspecting of the abrupt change that lay in wait for my soul, have to
go into yet other hotels, where I would dine for the first time, where
habit would not yet have slain, on each floor, before each door, the
terrifying dragon that had seemed to stand watch over an enchanted
existence, where I would have to go up to those unknown women that grand
hotels, casinos and beach resorts serve merely to bring together and
cause to live in common, like so many vast polyparies?

I had derived pleasure even from the fact that the tiresome First
President should have been in such a hurry to call on me; I had seen,
for the first day, waves, the azure mountain ranges of the sea, its
glaciers and its waterfalls, its elevation and its careless majesty –
merely by smelling, for the first time in so long, as I washed my hands,
the distinctive odour of the too highly scented Grand-Hôtel soap –
which, seeming to belong simultaneously to the present moment and to my
past stay, floated between them like the real charm of a particular way
of life in which you return home only to change your tie. The sheets on
the bed, too fine, too light, too vast, impossible to tuck in, to hold
in place, and which remained puffed up around the blankets in shifting
scrolls, would once have saddened me. On the unwieldy, billowing
roundness of their sails, they merely cradled the glorious, hope-filled
sunshine of early morning. But the sun did not have time to appear.
During that same night, the dreadful, divine presence had been
resurrected. I begged the manager to go, to ask that no one should come
in. I told him I should be staying in bed and rejected his offer of
sending to the chemist’s for his excellent preparation. He was overjoyed
by my refusal for he was afraid that the guests might be incommoded by
the smell of ‘calyptus’. Which earned me this compliment: ‘You’re in the
swim’ (he meant to say ‘in the right’), and this piece of advice: ‘Mind
you don’t dirty yourself on the door, for, relating to the locks, I’ve
had it “coasted” with oil; if one of the staff were to dare knock at
your room, he’d get a “threshing”. And that can be taken as read, for I
don’t like “recitations” (which evidently meant: “I don’t like having to
recite things twice”). Only, for a pick-me-up wouldn’t you like a drop
of the old wine I’ve got a bust of downstairs (no doubt for “butt”?). I
shan’t bring it to you on a silver dish like the head of Jonathan,¹²⁵
and I must warn you it’s not Château-Lafite, but it’s more or less
equivocal (for “equivalent”). And because it’s light, they could fry you
a small sole.’ I refused everything, but was surprised to hear the name
of the fish (_sole_) pronounced like the word for a willow tree
(_saule_), by a man who must have ordered so many of them in his
lifetime.

Despite the manager’s promises, a little later on I was brought the
turned-down visiting-card of the Marquise de Cambremer. Having come to
see me, the old lady had sent to ask whether I was there, and when she
learned that my arrival dated only from the previous day, and that I was
indisposed, she had not insisted, but (doubtless not without stopping
off at the chemist’s or the haberdasher’s, where the footman had jumped
from his seat to go in and pay some account or lay in supplies) the
Marquise had left again for Féterne, in her ancient eight-spring calash
and pair. Quite often indeed, its rumble was to be heard, and its pomp
admired, in the streets of Balbec and of several other small localities
along the coast, situated between Balbec and Féterne. Not that these
stops at suppliers’ were the object of these outings. This, on the
contrary, would be a tea-party, or _garden-party_, at the house of some
squireen or bourgeois quite unworthy of the Marquise. But the latter,
although, by her birth and fortune, she lorded it over the minor
nobility of the district, was so afraid, in her perfect kindness and
simplicity, of letting someone down who had invited her that she went to
the most insignificant social gatherings in the neighbourhood.
Admittedly, rather than travel such a long way to come and hear, in the
heat of some stifling small drawing-room, a soprano generally devoid of
talent and to whom, in her capacity as great lady of the district and a
musician of repute, she would then have to offer her exaggerated
congratulations, Mme de Cambremer would have preferred to go for a drive
or to remain in her wonderful gardens at Féterne, at the foot of which
the drowsy waves of a small bay come to expire amidst the flowers. But
she knew that her probable coming had been announced by the host,
whether he were a nobleman or a freeman of Maineville-la-Teinturière or
Chattoncourt-l’Orgeuilleux. Now, if Mme de Cambremer had left home that
day without putting in an appearance at the festivity, one or other of
the guests coming from one of the small resorts along the sea could have
heard and seen the Marquise’s calash, which would have robbed her of the
excuse of having been unable to leave Féterne. On the other hand, for
all that these hosts had often seen Mme de Cambremer going to concerts
given in the houses of people where they considered it was not her place
to be, the slight lowering that, as they saw it, this fact inflicted on
the standing of the too good-natured Marquise, vanished as soon as it
was they who were entertaining, and it was feverishly that they asked
themselves whether they would or would not be getting her at their small
tea-party. What relief, for anxieties felt for several days past, if,
after the first piece sung by the hosts’ daughter or by some amateur
holidaying locally, a guest announced (an infallible sign that the
Marquise would be coming to the matinée) that they had seen the horses
of the famous calash halted in front of the watchmaker or the druggist!
Then Mme de Cambremer (who indeed would not be long in making her entry,
followed by her daughter-in-law and by guests she currently had residing
with her, and whom she had asked permission, granted with what delight,
to bring with her) would recover all her lustre in the eyes of the
hosts, for whom the reward of her hoped-for coming had perhaps been the
determining but unacknowledged reason for the decision they had taken a
month earlier: to inflict on themselves the bother and expense of giving
a matinée. Seeing the Marquise present at their tea-party, they no
longer remembered her willingness to attend those of ill-qualified
neighbours, but the antiquity of her family, the luxury of her château,
and the rudeness of her daughter-in-law, _née_ Legrandin, who, by her
arrogance, threw into relief the somewhat mawkish good nature of the
mother-in-law. They already fancied they could read, on the society page
of the _Gaulois_, the paragraph that they would themselves concoct _en
famille_, behind locked doors, about ‘the little corner of Brittany
where they know how to enjoy themselves, the ultra-select matinée from
which no one tore themselves away without having made their hosts
promise to repeat it without delay.’ Each day they would await the
newspaper, concerned at not yet having seen any mention of their
matinée, and fearing that they had got Mme de Cambremer for their guests
alone and not for the multitude of readers. At last the blessed day
arrived: ‘The season is exceptionally brilliant this year in Balbec. The
fashion is for small afternoon concerts, etc.’ Lord be praised, Mme de
Cambremer’s name had been spelt correctly and ‘cited at random’, but in
first place. All that remained was to appear annoyed by this
indiscretion on the part of the newspapers, which might lead to a
falling-out with the people one had been unable to invite, and to ask
hypocritically, in front of Mme de Cambremer, who could have been so
perfidious as to send in this item of gossip, of which the Marquise,
ever the benevolent _grande dame_, said: ‘I can understand it annoying
you but for my own part I’m only too happy for it to be known that I
came to you.’

On the card I was handed, Mme de Cambremer had scribbled that she was
giving a matinée in two days’ time. And certainly, only two days before,
however tired of socializing I might have been, it would have been a
real pleasure to sample it transplanted into those gardens where, thanks
to Féterne’s exposure, fig trees, palms and rose bushes grew out in the
open, all the way down to a sea often of a Mediterranean calm and blue,
across which the owners’ small yacht would go, before the party began,
to fetch the more important guests from the resorts on the far side of
the bay, and serve, its awnings spread against the sun, once everyone
had arrived, as a dining-room for the tea, and set off again in the
evening to take back those whom it had brought. A charming luxury, but
so costly that it was partly in order to offset the expense it entailed
that Mme de Cambremer had sought to increase her income in various ways,
and notably by letting, for the first time, one of her properties, very
different from Féterne: La Raspelière. Yes, two days ago, what a change
such a matinée, populated by unfamiliar minor nobility, in a new
setting, would have made from the ‘high life’ of Paris! But now
pleasures no longer had any meaning for me. I wrote therefore to Mme de
Cambremer to make my excuses, just as an hour earlier I had sent
Albertine away: sorrow had abolished the possibility of desire in me as
completely as a high fever takes away the appetite. My mother was to
arrive the following day. It seemed to me that I was less unworthy of
living beside her, that I would understand her better, now that a whole
alien and degrading existence had made way for the resurgence of
heart-rending memories that had garlanded and ennobled my soul, like
hers, with their crown of thorns. Or so I believed; in reality there is
every difference between genuine grief like that of Mama – which
literally takes away your life for long periods, sometimes for ever, the
moment you have lost the person that you love – and that other grief,
ephemeral in spite of everything, as mine was to be, which goes away
quickly just as it is late in coming, which we experience only long
after the event because in order to feel it we needed to ‘understand’
that event; grief such as so many people experience and from which the
grief that was now torturing me differed only in its modality, of
involuntary memory.

As for a grief as deep as that of my mother, I was to know that one day,
as will be seen in due course in this narrative, but it was not now, nor
thus that I pictured it to myself. Nevertheless, just as a narrator, who
ought to know his lines and have taken up his place long before, but has
arrived only at the last second and having read what he is to say only
once, is able to disguise the fact skilfully enough when the time comes
to respond to his cue, so that no one is made aware of his late arrival,
my new-found grief enabled me, when my mother arrived, to talk to her as
if it had always been the same. She merely thought that the sight of the
places where I had been with my grandmother (though this was not in fact
it) had reawoken it. Then for the first time, and because I felt a
sorrow that was nothing in comparison with her own, but which had opened
my eyes, I realised with terror what she might be suffering. I
understood for the first time that the fixed, tearless gaze (which meant
that Françoise felt little pity for her) which she had had since my
grandmother’s death, had been dwelling on this incomprehensible
contradiction between memory and nothingness. Moreover, though still in
her black veils, but more dressed-up in this new place, I was the more
struck by the transformation that had taken place in her. It is not
enough to say that she had lost all her gaiety; having melted and become
congealed into a sort of imploring image, she seemed to be afraid, by
too abrupt a movement, too loud a tone of voice, of giving offence to
the sorrowful presence that never left her. But above all, the moment I
saw her enter in her crêpe coat, I realized – what had eluded me in
Paris – that it was no longer my mother I saw in front of me, but my
grandmother. Just as, in royal or ducal families, when the head of the
family dies the son takes his title, and, from having been the Duc
d’Orléans, Prince de Tarente or Prince des Laumes, becomes King of
France, Duc de la Trémoïlle, or Duc de Guermantes,¹²⁶ so, frequently, by
an accession of a different order, and of a more profound origin, the
dead man seizes hold of the living one, who becomes his successor in his
own likeness, the perpetuator of his interrupted life. Perhaps all that
the great grief does which, in a daughter such as Mama was, ensues on
the death of her mother, is to break open the chrysalid a little sooner,
to hasten the metamorphosis and the appearance of a being that we bear
within us and which, but for this crisis, which misses out the
intermediate stages and covers long periods at a single bound, would
only have supervened more slowly. Perhaps, in the regret for the one who
is no more, there is a sort of suggestion which in the end produces on
our own features similarities that were already latent in us, and that
above all arrests our more particularly individual activities (in my
mother’s case, her common sense, and the mocking high spirits she had
got from her father), which, for as long as the person greatly loved was
alive, we were not afraid to exercise, be it at their expense, and which
counter-balanced the character that we had got exclusively from them.
Once she is dead, we would feel qualms about being other, we now admire
only what she was, what we already were, but mixed in with something
else, and what henceforth we shall be alone. It is in this sense (and
not in that very vague, very false sense in which it is generally
understood) that we can say that death is not without its use, that the
dead person continues to exercise an influence on us. They influence us
more even than the living because, the true reality being set free only
by the mind, being the object of a mental process, we truly know only
what we are obliged to re-create by thought, what everyday life keeps
hidden from us… Finally, in this cult of regret for our dead, we make
idols of that which they loved. Not only could my mother not be parted
from my grandmother’s bag, more precious for her now than if it had been
of sapphires and diamonds, from her muff, from all the garments that
brought out still more strongly how alike the two of them were in
appearance, but even from the volumes of Mme de Sévigné¹²⁷ that my
grandmother was never without, copies that my mother would not have
exchanged for the manuscript of the _Letters_ itself. She had teased my
grandmother in the old days, who never once wrote to her without quoting
a sentence from Mme de Sévigné or Mme de Beausergent.¹²⁸ In each of the
three letters I received from Mama before her arrival in Balbec, she
quoted Mme de Sévigné at me, as if these three letters had been, not
addressed by her to me, but addressed by my grandmother to her. She
wanted to go down on to the esplanade to see the beach that my
grandmother spoke of every day when writing to her. Holding her mother’s
_en-tout-cas_ in her hand, I saw her from the window, advancing all in
black, with timid, pious steps, across the sand that cherished feet had
trodden before her, and she seemed to be going in search of a dead body
that the waves were to bring back to her. So as not to let her dine
alone, I had to go downstairs with her. The First President and the
widow of the _bâtonnier_ had themselves introduced to her. And she was
so sensitive to everything connected with my grandmother that she was
infinitely touched, and preserved ever afterwards the memory and her
gratitude for what the First President said to her, just as she felt
hurt and indignant at the fact that, on the other hand, the
_bâtonnier_’s wife spoke not one word in remembrance of the dead woman.
In point of fact, the First President felt no more concern for her than
did the _bâtonnier_’s wife. The emotional words of the one and the
silence of the other were only, although my mother set so great a
distance between them, different ways of expressing the indifference
that the dead inspire in us. But I believe that my mother took comfort
above all from the words into which, against my will, I allowed a little
of my pain to pass. It could but make Mama happy (despite all the
affection she had for me), like everything that ensured my grandmother’s
survival in our hearts. On each of the days following, my mother went
down to sit on the beach, to do exactly as her mother had done, and read
her two favourite books, the _Memoirs_ of Mme de Beausergent and the
_Letters_ of Mme de Sévigné. She, or any of us, could not bear the
last-named being referred to as the ‘witty Marquise’, any more than La
Fontaine as ‘_le Bonhomme_’ or ‘good old La Fontaine’.¹²⁹ But when in
the letters she read the words ‘my daughter’, she thought she heard her
mother speaking to her.

She had the ill luck, on one of these pilgrimages when she did not want
to be disturbed, to meet on the beach a lady from Combray, followed by
her daughters. I believe her name was Mme Poussin. But among ourselves
we only ever used to call her ‘We’ll see how you like that’, for it was
by this phrase, constantly repeated, that she warned her daughters of
the evils they were storing up for themselves, saying to the one who was
rubbing her eyes, for example: ‘Once you’ve got a nice ophthalmia, we’ll
see how you like that.’ She addressed long, tearful greetings to my
mother from a distance, not as a sign of condolence, but because such
had been her upbringing. Even had we not lost my grandmother and had
reason only to be happy, she would have done the same. Living a somewhat
withdrawn life in Combray, in an immense garden, she considered that
nothing was ever soft enough and subjected the words and even the names
of the French language to a softening process. She considered it too
harsh to call the item of silverware that poured out her syrups a
_cuiller_ and would say in consequence, _cueiller_;¹³⁰ she would have
been afraid of giving offence to the gentle songster of _Télémaque_ by
calling him, crudely, Fénelon¹³¹ – as I did myself, with good reason,
having for my dearest friend the best, most intelligent, and bravest of
human beings, unforgettable for all who knew him, Bertrand de Fénelon –
and only ever said ‘Fénélon’, considering that the acute accent added a
certain mellowness. The not so soft son-in-law of this Mme Poussin,
whose name I have forgotten, when he was a notary in Combray, ran off
with the cash-box and caused my uncle, notably, to lose quite a
considerable sum. But most of the people of Combray were so well
disposed towards the other members of the family that no coldness
resulted and all they did was to feel sorry for Mme Poussin. She did not
entertain, but every time you passed in front of her railings you
stopped to admire the admirable shade under the trees, without being
able to make out anything more. She hardly troubled us in Balbec, where
I met her only once, at a moment when she was saying to her daughter,
busy gnawing at her fingernails: ‘When you’ve got a nice whitlow, we’ll
see how you like that.’

While Mama was reading on the beach I remained in my room on my own. I
recalled the last days of my grandmother’s life and everything connected
with them, the staircase door that had been kept open when we went out
for her last walk. In contrast to all of which, the rest of the world
seemed scarcely real and my suffering poisoned it in its entirety.
Finally, my mother demanded that I go out. But at each step, some
forgotten aspect of the casino, of the street in which, as I waited for
her, that first evening, I had gone as far as the statue of
Duguay-Trouin,¹³² prevented me, like a wind against which you can not
battle, from going any further; I looked down so as not to see. And
having recovered some of my strength, I went back towards the hotel,
towards the hotel where I knew it was henceforth impossible that,
however, long I might wait, I should find my grandmother again, my
grandmother whom I had once found, on the first evening of our arrival.
Since this was the first time I had gone out, many of the servants that
I had not yet seen looked at me curiously. On the actual doorstep of the
hotel a young _chasseur_ took off his cap to salute me and promptly put
it back on again. I imagined that Aimé had, to use his own expression,
‘passed on the order’ that I was to be shown respect. But I saw in that
same instant that, for someone else who was coming back in, he removed
it again. The truth was that all this young man knew in life was how to
take off and replace his cap, and this he did to perfection. Having
realized that he was incapable of anything else but excelled at this, he
performed it the greatest number of times he could each day, which
earned for him a discreet but general sympathy on the part of the
clientele, great sympathy, too, on the part of the porter, to whom fell
the task of engaging the _chasseurs_ and who, up until this _rara avis_,
had been unable to find one who did not get himself dismissed within the
week, to the great astonishment of Aimé, who used to say: ‘Yet in that
trade little more’s asked of them than to be polite, that shouldn’t be
so hard.’ The manager insisted also that they should look ‘present’ as
he put it, meaning that they should remain there, or rather having
failed to retain the word ‘presentable’. The appearance of the lawn that
stretched behind the hotel had been modified by the creation of a few
flowerbeds and the removal, not only of an exotic shrub, but of the
_chasseur_ who, the first year, had adorned the entrance externally with
the supple stem of his body and the curious colour of his hair. He had
followed a Polish countess who had taken him on as a secretary,
imitating in this his two elder brothers and his typist sister, snatched
from the hotel by personalities of various countries and gender, who had
been smitten by their charms. The youngest alone remained, whom no one
wanted because he had a squint. He was very happy when the Polish
countess and the patrons of the other two came to spend some time at the
hotel in Balbec. For, although he envied his brothers, he loved them and
was thus able for a few weeks to cultivate family feelings. Was the
Abbess of Fontevrault not in the habit, for which she used to abandon
her nuns, of going to share in the hospitality offered by Louis XIV to
the other Mortemart, his mistress, Mme de Montespan?¹³³ As for him, this
was the first year he had been in Balbec; he did not yet know me, but
having heard his longer-serving fellows follow the word Monsieur when
they were speaking to me by my name, he imitated them from the very
first occasion with an air of satisfaction, either at displaying his
training in relation to a personality he adjudged to be well known, or
else at conforming to a usage of which he had been unaware five minutes
previously but from which it seemed to him indispensable not to depart.
I understood very well the attraction this grand hotel might have for
certain people. It was arranged like a theatre, and a numerous cast of
extras gave life to it all the way up into the flies. Although the guest
was only a sort of spectator, he was constantly involved in the
spectacle, not even as in those theatres where the actors perform one
scene in the auditorium, but as if the spectator’s own life were
unfolding amidst the sumptuousness of a stage-set. The tennis player
might re-enter in a white flannel jacket, but the porter would have put
on a blue dress-coat with silver braid to hand him his letters. If this
tennis player did not want to walk up, he was no less involved with the
actors for having at his side, to take the lift up, the equally richly
costumed ‘lift’. The upstairs corridors secreted an escape of
chambermaids and guests’ maids, as lovely against the sea as the frieze
of the Panathenaea,¹³⁴ all the way to the little bedrooms to which the
connoisseurs of ancillary female beauty would come by knowing detours.
Downstairs, it was the masculine element that dominated and turned this
hotel, thanks to the extreme and indolent youthfulness of its servants,
into a sort of Judeo-Christian tragedy that had become flesh and was in
continuous performance. Thus I could not help repeating to myself, on
seeing them, not, for sure, the lines of Racine that had come into my
head at the Princesse de Guermantes’s as M. de Vaugoubert was watching
the young secretaries from the embassy greeting M. de Charlus, but some
other lines from Racine, no longer from _Esther_ this time, but from
_Athalie_: for, starting in the hallway, what in the seventeenth century
was known as the portico, there stood ‘_un peuple florissant_’¹³⁵ of
young _chasseurs_, especially at tea-time, like the young Israelites of
Racine’s choruses. But I do not believe a single one of them would have
been able to supply even the vague answer that Joas finds for Athalie
when the latter asks the child prince: ‘_Quel est donc votre
emploi?_’,¹³⁶ for they had none. At the very most, had any one of their
number been asked, like the old queen: ‘_Mais tout ce peuple enfermé
dans ce lieu,/A quoi s’occupe-t-il?_’,¹³⁷ he might have been able to
say: ‘ “_Je vois l’ ordre pompeux de ces cérémonies_”,¹³⁸ and have my
part in them.’ From time to time, one of these young extras would move
towards some more important character, then the young beauty would
rejoin the chorus, and, unless it were a moment of contemplative
respite, all would interweave in their futile, respectful, decorative,
everyday manoeuvres. For except on their day off, ‘_loin du monde
élevés_’,¹³⁹ and never going beyond the parvis, they led the same
ecclesiastical existence as the Levites in _Athalie_, and, faced by this
‘_troupe jeune et fidèle_’,¹⁴⁰ playing at the foot of stairs covered in
magnificent carpets, I was able to wonder whether I was making my way
into the Grand-Hôtel in Balbec or the Temple of Solomon.

I went directly up to my room. My thoughts had become habitually fixed
on the last days of my grandmother’s illness, on the sufferings that I
was reliving, while increasing them by the element, even harder to
endure than the actual suffering of others, added to them by the cruelty
of our compassion; when we believe we are merely re-creating the pain of
a beloved being, our compassion exaggerates it; yet perhaps it is the
compassion that is right, rather than the awareness which those who are
suffering have of their pain, from whom the sadness of their life is
hidden, whereas compassion sees it, and despairs. Even so, my compassion
would have gained fresh impetus and exceeded my grandmother’s sufferings
had I known then what I was long unaware of, that, on the eve of her
death, in a conscious moment and after making sure that I was not there,
she had taken Mama’s hand and, after pressing her fevered lips to it,
had said to her: ‘Good-bye, daughter, good-bye for ever.’ And it was
perhaps this memory also that my mother never again ceased to gaze at so
fixedly. Then the sweet memories came back to me. She was my grandmother
and I was her grandson. The expressions of her face seemed written in a
language that was for me alone; she was everything in my life, others
existed only in relation to her, to the judgment she would pass on them;
but no, our relations were too fleeting not to have been accidental. She
no longer knows me, I shall never see her again. We had not been created
solely for one another, she was a stranger. I was busy looking at
Saint-Loup’s photograph of that stranger. Mama, who had met Albertine,
had insisted that I see her because of the kind things she had said to
her about grandmother and about myself. I had arranged to meet her
therefore. I warned the manager so that he would make her wait in the
lounge. He told me he had known her from a long way back, she and her
friends, well before they had attained ‘the age of purity’, but that he
resented things they had said about the hotel. ‘They can’t be so very
“illustrated” to talk like that. Unless they’ve been slandered.’ I
understood easily enough that he had said ‘purity’ for ‘puberty’. While
waiting for it to be time to go and find Albertine, I kept my eyes
fixed, as if on a drawing that in the end you are unable to see by dint
of having stared at it, on the photograph Saint-Loup had taken, when all
of a sudden I again thought: ‘It’s grandmother, I am her grandson,’ just
as an amnesiac rediscovers his name, or as an invalid changes
personality. Françoise entered, to tell me that Albertine was there and,
on seeing the photograph: ‘Poor Madame, it’s her all over, right down to
the beauty spot on her cheek; the day the Marquis photographed her,
she’d been very ill, she’d had two bad turns. “Above all, Françoise, she
says to me, my grandson mustn’t know.” And she hid it so well, she was
always cheerful in company. Alone, mark you, I thought she seemed at
times as if her spirits were a bit monotonous. But it soon passed. And
then she’d say to me right out: “If anything were ever to happen to me,
he’d need to have a portrait of me. I’ve never had a single one done.”
Then she sent me to say to Monsieur the Marquis, advising him not to
tell Monsieur it was her who’d asked him, whether he couldn’t take her
photograph. But when I came back to tell her yes, she wouldn’t any more
because she thought she looked so poorly. “It’d be even worse, she says
to me, than no photograph at all.” But as she wasn’t stupid, she finally
arranged things very well by putting on a big turned-down hat so it no
longer showed when she wasn’t in the full daylight. She was very pleased
with her photograph, because at that moment she didn’t think she’d be
returning from Balbec. It was no good my saying: “You mustn’t talk that
way, Madame, I don’t like hearing Madame talking that way”, she’d got it
into her head. And, good Lord, there were several days when she wasn’t
able to eat. That’s why she urged Monsieur to go and dine a long way off
with Monsieur le Marquis. Then instead of going to the table she
pretended to read and as soon as the Marquis’s carriage had gone, she
went up to bed. Some days she wanted to warn Madame to come so she’d see
her again. And then she was afraid it would surprise her, as she hadn’t
said anything to her. “It’s better she stays with her husband, you know,
Françoise.” ’ Françoise, her eyes on me, asked all of a sudden if I felt
‘indisposed’. I told her no; and she: ‘And then you keep me tied up here
talking to you. Perhaps your visit’s arrived already. I must go down.
She’s not a person for here. And always on the move as she is, she may
have left again. She doesn’t like to wait. Oh, now, Mademoiselle
Albertine, she’s quite a one. – You’re wrong, Françoise, she’s quite
respectable, too respectable for here. But go and warn her I shan’t be
able to see her today.’

What pitying declamations I should have aroused in Françoise had she
seen me crying! I carefully hid it from her. Otherwise I should have had
her sympathy. But I gave her mine. We do not put ourselves sufficiently
often into the hearts of these poor servants who cannot see us cry, as
if crying were harmful to us; or perhaps harmful to them, Françoise
having said to me when I was small: ‘Don’t cry like that, I don’t like
seeing you cry like that.’ We do not like high-flown phrases or
attestations, and we are wrong, we thereby close our hearts to the
pathos of the countryside, to the legend which the poor serving-woman,
having been dismissed, perhaps unjustly, for stealing, white-faced,
become suddenly humbler as if to be accused were a crime, unfolds in
invoking her father’s honesty, her mother’s principles, her
grandmother’s good advice. Admittedly, these same servants who can not
endure our tears, will not hesitate to make us catch pneumonia because
the housemaid downstairs likes draughts and it would not be polite to
prevent them. For the very ones who are right, like Françoise, have also
to be wrong, so that Justice becomes an impossibility. Even the humble
pleasures of women servants provoke either a refusal or the mockery of
their employers. For it is always some trifle, foolishly sentimental and
unhygienic. Thus they may say: ‘What, it’s the one thing I ask for all
year, and I’m not granted it.’ Yet the employers would grant far more,
were it not stupid or dangerous for them – or for themselves. True,
there is no withstanding the humility of the poor housemaid, trembling,
ready to confess to what she has not committed, saying ‘I’ll go this
evening if I have to.’ But we must be able also not to remain
insensitive, for all the solemn, threatening banality of the things she
says, to her maternal heritage and the dignity of the ‘close’, faced by
an old cook draped in an honourable life and ancestry, clutching her
broom like a sceptre, playing her role for tragedy, interspersing it
with tears, drawing herself majestically up. On the day in question I
recalled or imagined such scenes, and I linked them to our old servant,
after which, despite all the harm she was able to do Albertine, I loved
Françoise with an affection, intermittent it is true, but of the
strongest kind, that which is founded on compassion.

Certainly, I suffered all that day by remaining in front of my
grandmother’s photograph. It tormented me. Less, however, than did the
manager’s evening visit. As I was talking to him of my grandmother and
he was renewing his condolences, I heard him say (for he loved using the
words he mispronounced): ‘It’s like the day when Madame your grandmother
had that suncopy, I wanted to warn you, because on account of the
clientele, you know? It might have been bad for the establishment. It
would’ve been better for her to leave that same evening. But she begged
me not to say anything and promised me she wouldn’t have any more
suncopies or that she’d leave at the first one. The _chef de l’étage_
reported to me, however, that she’d had another one. But, good Lord, you
were old patrons we were trying to please, and given that no one had
complained…’ So my grandmother had had syncopes and had kept them from
me. Perhaps at the very time when I was being least nice to her, and
when she was obliged, unwell though she was, to be careful to remain
good-humoured so as not to annoy me and to appear to be healthy so as
not to be shown the door of the hotel. ‘Suncopy’ is a word that, so
pronounced, I would never have imagined, which would perhaps, applied to
others, have struck me as absurd, but which, by the strange novelty of
its sound, similar to that of an original dissonance, long remained what
was capable of evoking the most painful sensations in me.

The next day I went at Mama’s request to stretch out on the sand for a
while, or rather in the dunes, at a point where you are hidden by their
folds, and where I knew that Albertine and her friends would not be able
to find me. My lowered eyelids let through only one, pink, light, that
of the internal walls of my eyes. Then they closed altogether. And now
my grandmother appeared to me sitting in an armchair. She was so weak
she seemed less alive than other people. Yet I could hear her breathing;
now and again, a sign showed that she had understood what we were
saying, my father and I. But it was in vain that I embraced her, I could
not succeed in arousing a look of affection in her eyes or a spot of
colour in her cheeks. Absent from herself, she appeared not to love me,
not to know me, perhaps not to see me. I could not guess the secret of
her indifference, her dejection, her silent displeasure. I drew my
father aside. ‘You can tell all the same, I said, there’s no denying it,
she’s taken everything in perfectly. It’s a complete illusion of life.
If only we could get your cousin to come who claims that the dead aren’t
alive! It’s more than a year now since she died yet all in all she’s
still alive. But why won’t she embrace me? – Look, her poor head is
falling back. – But she’d like to go to the Champs-Elysées in a little
while. – That’s madness! – Really, you think it could do her any harm,
that she could die any more? It’s not possible she no longer loves me.
It’ll be no good my embracing her, will she never smile at me again? –
What do you expect, the dead are the dead.’

A few days later I found comfort in looking at the photograph Saint-Loup
had taken; it did not reawaken the memory of what Françoise had told me
because that had not left me again and I had become used to it. But in
contrast to the idea I had formed of how serious and painful her
condition was that day, the photograph, profiting still from the
stratagems my grandmother had employed, which succeeded in deceiving me
even now that they had been uncovered, showed her looking so elegant, so
carefree, beneath the hat that partly hid her face, that I saw her as
less unhappy and in better health than I had imagined. And yet, her
cheeks having, without her knowing it, an expression of their own,
something leaden and haggard, like the look of an animal that feels
itself already chosen and marked down, my grandmother wore the air of
someone under a death sentence, an involuntarily sombre, unconsciously
tragic air that had eluded me but which stopped Mama from ever looking
at this photograph, a photograph that seemed to her a photograph not so
much of her mother as of the latter’s illness, of an insult delivered by
that illness to Grandmother’s brutally abused face.

Then one day I made up my mind to let Albertine know that I would
receive her shortly. The fact was that, one morning of great and
premature heat, the innumerable shouts of the children playing, of the
bathers as they joked, of the newspaper sellers, had described to me, in
lines of fire, in a latticework of sparks, the scorching hot beach,
which the ripples were coming one by one to sprinkle with their
coolness; then the symphony concert had begun, mixed in with the lapping
of the water, in which the violins vibrated like a swarm of bees strayed
over the sea. I had at once longed to hear Albertine’s laugh once more,
to see her friends again, the young girls, outlined against the waves,
who had remained in my memory as the inseparable charm, the
characteristic flora of Balbec; and I had resolved to send word to
Albertine by Françoise, for the following week, as, gently rising, at
each unfurling of a wave, the crystalline flux of the sea completely
drowned the melody, whose phrases seemed separated one from the next,
like those angels with their lutes who, on the roof-ridge of the Italian
cathedral, rise up between the crests of blue porphyry and foaming
jasper. But on the day when Albertine came, the weather had deteriorated
again and grown cooler, and I had no opportunity in any case of hearing
her laugh; she was in a very bad mood. ‘Balbec’s a bore this year, she
said. I shall try not to stay long. You know I’ve been here since
Easter, that’s more than a month. There’s no one. If you think that’s a
lot of fun.’ Despite the recent rain and the sky that was changing from
minute to minute, after going with Albertine as far as Epreville, since
Albertine, to use her own term, was ‘ferrying’ between the small resort
where Mme Bontemps’s villa was, and Incarville, where she had been taken
in ‘_en pension_’ by Rosemonde’s parents, I left to take a walk on my
own towards the main road that Mme de Villeparisis’s carriage had taken
when we went out with my grandmother; puddles of water that the bright
sunshine had not dried out had turned the ground into a real quagmire,
and I thought of my grandmother who, in the old days, could not go two
steps without getting mud on her. But the moment I reached the road,
what bedazzlement. There where, in August, with my grandmother, I had
seen only the leaves and as it were the emplacement of the apple trees,
they were in full flower for as far as the eye could see, unimaginably
luxuriant, their feet in the mud but wearing their ball-gowns, not
taking any precautions so as not to spoil the most marvellous pink satin
that you ever set eyes on, made to shine by the sunlight; the far-off
horizon of the sea provided the apple trees with what was in effect a
background from a Japanese print; if I raised my head to look at the sky
between the flowers, which made its blue appear the more cloudless,
almost violent, they seemed to draw aside so as to display the depth of
that paradise. Beneath this azure a slight but fresh breeze was causing
the reddening bouquets to shiver slightly. Blue tits were coming to
settle on the branches and were leaping about among the indulgent
flowers, as if it were some lover of exoticism and of colours who had
artificially created this living beauty. But it moved one almost to
tears because, however excessive these effects of a refined artifice,
you felt that it was natural, that these apple trees were there, in the
heart of the countryside, like peasants, on one of the highways of
France. Then to the rays of sunlight there suddenly succeeded those of
the rain; they striped the entire horizon, drawing their grey mesh tight
round the line of apple trees. But these continued to raise aloft their
pink, flowering beauty, in a wind now become icy beneath the shower of
rain that was falling: it was a day in spring.


CHAPTER 2


_The mysteries of Albertine. – The girls she sees in the mirror. – The
unknown lady. – The liftboy. – Madame de Cambremer. – The pleasures of
M. Nissim Bernard. – First outline of Morel’s strange character. – M. de
Charlus dines at the Verdurins’._

In my fear that the pleasure found in this solitary walk might weaken
the memory of my grandmother in me, I sought to revive it by thinking of
some great moral suffering that she had experienced; at my summons, this
suffering tried to erect itself in my heart, throwing up its immense
pillars there; but my heart was doubtless too small for it, I did not
have the strength to bear so great a sorrow, my attention slipped away
just as it was reforming into a whole, and its arches crumbled before
they had come together, just as waves break before they have completed
their vault.

Meanwhile, if only from my dreams when I was asleep, I might have
learned that my grief at my grandmother’s death was diminishing, for she
appeared there less oppressed by the idea I had been forming of her
non-existence. I saw her as an invalid still, but on the way to
recovering; I thought she looked better. And if she alluded to what she
had suffered, I stopped her mouth with my kisses and assured her that
now she was cured for ever. I would have liked to make the sceptics
acknowledge that death is in truth an illness from which we recover.
Only I did not find in my grandmother the rich spontaneity of old. Her
words were only an enfeebled, docile response, a mere echo almost, of my
own words; she was no longer anything more than the reflection of my own
thoughts.

Incapable though I was as yet of again experiencing physical desire,
Albertine was beginning meanwhile to fill me with something like a
desire for happiness. Certain dreams of a shared tenderness, forever
floating inside us, readily unite themselves by a sort of affinity to
the memory (provided this has already become a little shadowy) of a
woman with whom we have experienced pleasure. This feeling recalled for
me aspects of Albertine’s face, softer, less cheerful, rather different
from those which physical desire would have evoked in me; and since it
was also less pressing than this last, I would willingly have adjourned
its realization to the following winter, without seeking to see
Albertine again in Balbec before her departure. Yet even in the midst of
a still keen grief, physical desire revives. From my bed, where I was
made to stay resting for long periods each day, I wished that Albertine
might come back and resume our old games. Are married couples not soon
to be found once again intertwined, in the very bedroom where they have
lost a child, in order to give the dead little one a brother? I tried to
find distraction from this desire by going to the window to look at that
day’s sea. As in that first year, the seas were rarely the same from one
day to the next. But they scarcely resembled those of that first year,
on the other hand, either because now it was spring, with its storms, or
because, even if I had come on the same date as the first occasion, the
different, more changeable weather might not have recommended this coast
to certain indolent, vaporous and fragile seas that I had seen on days
of burning heat sleeping on the beach, lifting their blue bosom
imperceptibly with a soft palpitation, or above all because my eyes,
educated by Elstir to retain precisely those elements that I had once
wilfully discarded, dwelt at length on what that first year they had not
known how to see. The opposition that had so struck me then, between the
rustic excursions I took with Mme de Villeparisis and this fluid,
inaccessible, mythological vicinity of the everlasting Ocean, no longer
existed for me. On certain days, the sea itself now seemed to me, on the
contrary, almost rural. On the quite rare days of truly fine weather,
the heat had traced on the water, as if across the countryside, a white
and dusty road, behind which there protruded, like a village steeple,
the delicate tip of a fishing-boat. A tugboat, of which only the funnel
was visible, would be smoking in the distance like a secluded factory,
while, alone on the horizon, a bellying white square, painted no doubt
by a sail but which appeared compact and as if made of chalk, put you in
mind of the sunlit corner of some isolated building, a hospital or a
school. And the clouds and the wind, on the days when they were added to
the sunshine, completed, if not the error of judgment, at least the
illusion of a first glance, the suggestion it awakens in the
imagination. For, on stormy days, the alternation between sharply
defined areas of colour, like those resulting in the countryside from
the contiguity of different crops, the harsh, yellow, as if muddy
irregularities of the sea’s surface, the embankments and slopes that hid
from view a boat on which a crew of agile sailors seemed to be
harvesting, all this made of the ocean something as varied, as
consistent, as uneven, as populous, as civilized, as the land that was
navigable, where I would before long be driving again. On one occasion,
unable any longer to withstand my desire, instead of going back to bed,
I got dressed and went off to find Albertine in Incarville. I would ask
her to go with me as far as Douville, where I would pay Mme de Cambremer
a visit at Féterne, and at La Raspelière, a visit to Mme Verdurin.
During which time, Albertine would be waiting for me on the beach and we
would come back together in the dark. I went to catch the little
branch-line train, all of whose local nicknames I had once learned from
Albertine and her friends, it being known variously as the _Slowcoach_,
on account of its innumerable detours, the _Rattletrap_, because of its
slow progress, the _Ocean Liner_, on account of a fearsome siren it
possessed to make passers-by get out of the way, the _Decauville_¹ and
the _Funi_, even though it was nothing like a funicular, but because it
climbed up the cliff, nor even, properly speaking, a Decauville, but
because it had a 60-centimetre track, the _B.A.G_. because it went from
Balbec to Grattevast via Angerville, the _tram_ and the _T.S.N_. because
it formed part of the line of the Tramways du Sud de la Normandie. I
installed myself in a carriage where I was alone, it was gloriously
sunny, and stifling; I lowered the blue blind, which let only a strip of
sunlight through. But I at once saw my grandmother, as she had been when
sitting in the train on our departure from Paris for Balbec, and when,
pained at seeing me drinking beer, she had preferred not to look, to
close her eyes and pretend to be asleep. I, who had been unable to
endure her sufferings in the old days when my grandfather took cognac, I
had inflicted this pain on her, not simply even of seeing me take, at
someone else’s invitation, a drink she believed disastrous for me, but I
had forced her to leave me free to swill it down as I pleased; worse
still, by my rages and my breathless attacks, I had forced her to help
me, to recommend it, in a supreme act of resignation whose wordless,
despairing image I had before my memory, her eyes closed so as not to
see. Such a memory, like a wave from a magic wand, had once again given
back to me the soul I had been in the act of losing for some time past;
what could I have done with Rosemonde² when across the whole of my lips
there was passing only a desperate desire to kiss a dead woman? What
could I have said to the Cambremers and the Verdurins when my heart was
pounding because the sorrow that my grandmother had endured was
constantly re-forming there? I could not remain in that carriage. As
soon as the train stopped in Maineville-la-Teinturière, abandoning my
plans, I got out. Maineville had for some time past been acquiring a
considerable importance and a particular reputation, because a director
of numerous casinos, a purveyor of well-being, had had built, not far
from there, with an opulence of bad taste capable of competing with that
of a grand hotel, an establishment to which we shall be returning, and
which was, to make no bones about it, the first brothel for the smart
set that anyone had thought to build on the coasts of France. It was the
only one. Every port has its brothel, of course, but good only for
sailors and for lovers of local colour, who get amusement from seeing,
right next door to the immemorial church, the madam, herself almost as
old, venerable and moss-covered, standing in front of her door of ill
repute waiting for the fishing boats to return.

Avoiding the dazzling house of ‘pleasure’, insolently erected there
despite the family protests addressed in vain to the mayor, I rejoined
the cliff and followed its winding paths in the direction of Balbec. I
heard the summons of the hawthorns, without responding. As its less
affluent neighbours, they found the apple blossom very heavy, while
acknowledging the fresh complexions worn by the daughters, with their
pink petals, of the great cider-makers. They knew that, though less
richly dowried, they were yet more sought after, and that a rumpled
whiteness was all they required by way of attraction.

When I got back, the hotel porter handed me a letter announcing a
bereavement on the part of the Marquis and Marquise de Gonneville, the
Vicomte and Vicomtesse d’Amfreville, the Comte and Comtesse de
Berneville, the Marquis and Marquise de Graincourt, the Comte
d’Amenoncourt, the Comtesse de Maineville, the Comte and Comtesse de
Franquetot, the Comtesse de Chaverny _née_ d’Aigleville, and which I
finally understood why it had been sent to me when I recognized the
names of the Marquise de Cambremer _née_ du Mesnil La Guichard, and of
the Marquis and Marquise de Cambremer, and when I saw that the dead
woman, a cousin of the Cambremers, had been called
Eléonore-Euphrasie-Humbertine de Cambremer, Comtesse de Criquetot.
Nowhere in this extensive provincial family, the enumeration of which
filled lines of fine, close-set writing, was there a single bourgeois,
nor a single familiar title for that matter, but the whole _ban_ and
_arrière-ban_ of the regional nobility, whose names – those of all the
interesting places in the region – they made to sing with their joyful
endings in _ville_, or _court_, or sometimes more dully (in _tot_). Clad
in the tiles of their château or the roughcast of their church, their
nodding heads barely protruding above the vaulting or the _corps de
logis_, and then only in order to be crowned by the Norman lantern or
the half-timbering of the pepperpot roof, they seemed to have sounded
the rallying-cry for all the pretty villages arranged in echelon or
scattered for fifty leagues roundabout and to have set them out in close
formation, without one gap, or one intruder, on the compact, rectangular
chessboard of this aristocratic, black-edged letter.

My mother had gone back up to her room, meditating on this sentence from
Mme de Sévigné – ‘I see none of those who seek to distract me; in veiled
words, the fact is they want to stop me from thinking of you and that
offends me’ – because the First President had told her she should find
some amusement. To me he whispered: ‘It’s the Princesse de Parme.’ My
fear was dispelled on seeing that the woman the magistrate was pointing
to had no connection with Her Royal Highness. But since she had reserved
a room in order to spend the night on returning from Mme de
Luxembourg’s, the news had the effect on many of making them assume that
every newly arrived lady was the Princesse de Parme – and on me, of
making me go up and shut myself away in my garret. I would not have
wanted to remain there alone. It was barely four o’clock. I asked
Françoise to go and find Albertine so that she might come and spend the
end of the afternoon with me.

I think I would be lying if I said that the painful and perpetual
mistrust that Albertine was to inspire in me had already begun, let
alone the particular, above all Gomorran, character which that mistrust
was to assume. True, from that day forward – thought it was not the
first – my expectations were a little fraught. Françoise, once gone,
stayed away so long that I began to lose hope. I had not lit any lamps.
It was barely daylight any longer. The wind was making the flag on the
casino flap. And more sickly still, in the silence of the shore, where
the sea was coming in, and like a voice as it were translating and
enhancing the enervating uncertainty of that false, anxious hour of the
day, a small barrel-organ had stopped in front of the hotel and was
playing Viennese waltzes. At last Françoise arrived, but alone. ‘I’ve
been as quick as I could but she wouldn’t come because she didn’t think
her hair was good enough. If she didn’t stay a whole hour by the clock
pomading herself, she didn’t stay five minutes. It’ll be a real
scent-shop here. She’s coming, she stayed behind to fix herself up in
front of the mirror. I thought I’d find her here.’ It was still a long
time before Albertine arrived. But her cheerfulness and kindness on this
occasion dispelled my unhappiness. She announced (contrary to what she
had said the other day) that she would be staying for the whole season
and asked whether we could not, as the first year, see each other every
day. I told her that at the moment I was too unhappy and that instead I
would send for her from time to time, at the last minute, as in Paris.
‘If ever you feel sad or if your heart tells you to, don’t hesitate, she
said, send for me, I’ll come running, and if you’re not afraid it might
cause a scandal in the hotel, I’ll stay as long as you like.’ On
bringing her back, Françoise had worn a happy expression, as on every
occasion when she had put herself out on my behalf and succeeded in
pleasing me. But Albertine herself counted for nothing in this delight
and the very next day Françoise was to speak these profound words to me:
‘Monsieur shouldn’t see that young lady. I can easily tell the sort of
character she has, she’ll cause you unhappiness.’ Showing Albertine out,
I caught sight through the lit dining-room of the Princesse de Parme. I
merely looked at her while contriving not to be seen. But I will admit
that I found a certain grandeur in the regal courtesy that had caused me
to smile at the Guermantes’s. It is a principle that sovereign princes
are at home anywhere, and protocol translates this into dead and
worthless customs such as that which has it that the host should keep
his hat in his hand, in his own house, in order to show that he is no
longer at home but at the prince’s. Now the Princesse de Parme had not
perhaps formulated this idea to herself, but so imbued with it was she
that all her actions, invented on the spur of the moment to meet the
circumstances, betrayed it. When she got up from the table she handed
Aimé a large tip, as if he had been there solely on her account or as
if, on leaving a château, she were rewarding a _maître d’hôtel_ who had
been detailed to attend on her. She did not content herself with the
tip, moreover, but, with a gracious smile, addressed a few friendly and
flattering words to him, with which her mother had supplied her. A
minute more and she would be telling him that, just as the hotel was so
very well maintained, so Normandy was prospering, and that of all the
countries in the world she preferred France. Another coin slipped out of
the Princesse’s hand, for the _sommelier_, whom she had sent for and to
whom she insisted on expressing her satisfaction, like a general who has
just reviewed his troops. The ‘lift’ had come up at that same moment to
give her a reply; he, too, received a word, a smile and a tip, all
combined with some humble and encouraging words intended to prove that
she was nothing more than one of them. Since Aimé, the _sommelier_, the
‘lift’ and the others thought it would be impolite not to wear the
broadest of smiles for someone who was smiling at them, she was soon
surrounded by a group of servants with whom she chatted benevolently;
such manners being unusual in grand hotels, the people going past along
the beach, not knowing her name, thought they were seeing an habituée of
Balbec, who, on account of her unimpressive origins or out of
professional self-interest (she was perhaps the wife of a champagne
representative), was less different from the domestic staff than the
genuinely smart patrons. For my part, I thought of the palace in Parma,
and of the advice, part religious and part political, given to the
Princesse, who behaved towards the populace as though she must win them
over in order to reign one day; or rather, as though she were reigning
already.

I went back up into my room, but I was not alone there. I could hear the
mellow sound of someone playing Schumann. People, even those that we
love the most, may, it is true, become saturated by the sadness or
irritation that emanates from us. There is one thing, however, capable
of a power of exasperation to which no human being will ever attain: a
piano.

Albertine had made me take note of the dates on which she was due to be
away, to go to her girl-friends’ for a few days, and had made me write
down their addresses also in case I had need of her on one of these
evenings, since none of them lived too far away. This meant that, in
order to find her, a chain of flowers, linking one girl to another,
formed quite naturally around her. I dare to confess that many of her
friends – I did not yet love her – afforded me moments of pleasure on
one beach or another. These benevolent young companions did not seem
many in number. But lately my mind has gone back to them, and their
names have returned. I reckoned that in that one season, twelve granted
me their fragile favours. One name came back to me later, which made
thirteen. I then felt a childish fear of remaining on that number. I
reflected, alas, that I had overlooked the first of them, Albertine, who
was no more and who made the fourteenth.

To take up the thread of my story again, I had written down the names
and addresses of the girls at whose houses I would find her on such and
such a day when she would not be in Incarville, but I thought I would
take advantage of those days rather to go to Mme Verdurin’s. Our desires
for different women are in any case not all equally strong. On a
particular evening we cannot do without the woman who, afterwards, will
hardly trouble us for the next month or two. And besides, apart from the
reasons for alternating, for the study of which this is not the place,
after the great exertions of the flesh, the woman whose image haunts our
momentary senility is a woman whom we would hardly even kiss on the
brow. As for Albertine, I saw her rarely, and only on those widely
spaced-out evenings when I could not be without her. Should such a
desire take hold of me when she was too far from Balbec for Françoise to
be able to go there, I would send the ‘lift’ to Epreville, La Sogne or
Saint-Frichoux, by asking him to stop work a little early. He would come
into my room but left the door open, for, although he did his ‘job’ most
conscientiously, which was arduous, consisting of much cleaning,
starting at five o’clock in the morning, he could never find the
strength to close a door, and if you pointed out to him that it was
open, he would go back and, by succeeding in making a supreme effort,
give it a gentle push. With the democratic vanity characteristic of him,
but to which, in their careers, members of the fairly numerous
professions, lawyers, doctors, men of letters, never attain, referring
to another lawyer, man of letters or doctor simply as ‘my colleague’,
he, making use, quite rightly, of a term reserved for exclusive bodies
such as academies, for example, would say to me, when speaking of a
_chasseur_ who worked the lift one day in two, ‘I’m going to see my
_associate_ takes my place’. This vanity did not prevent him, with the
aim of improving what he called his ‘salary’, from accepting
remuneration for his errands, which had led Françoise to develop a
strong dislike of him: ‘Yes, the first time you see him he looks as if
butter wouldn’t melt in his mouth, but there are days when he’s about as
polite as a prison gate. They’re all just money-grubbers.’ A category in
which she had so often placed Eulalie, and in which, alas, for all the
misfortunes to which it was one day to lead me, she had already classed
Albertine, because she often saw me asking Mama, on behalf of my far
from wealthy loved one, for small objects, trinkets, which Françoise
thought inexcusable, because Mme Bontemps had only the one maid of all
work. Very soon, the ‘lift’, having taken off what I would have called
his uniform and what he termed his tunic, would appear in a straw hat,
with a cane, attentive to his gait and holding himself erect, for his
mother had advised him never to adopt the style of a ‘workman’ or
‘_chasseur_’. Just as, thanks to books, knowledge is knowledge to a
workman who is no longer a workman once his labours are over, so, thanks
to the boater and to the pair of gloves, elegance had been brought
within reach of the ‘lift’ who, having stopped taking guests up for the
evening, believed, like a young surgeon who has removed his smock, or
Sergeant Saint-Loup his uniform, he had turned into a perfect man of the
world. He did not in any case lack ambition, any more than a talent for
handling his cage and not causing you to stop between floors. But his
language was defective. I believed in his ambition because, in speaking
of the hall-porter, whose dependant he was, he would say: ‘my
hall-porter’, in the same tone of voice as a man who, owning in Paris
what the _chasseur_ would have called ‘a private mansion’, would have
spoken of his doorman. As for the liftboy’s language, it is odd that
someone who heard the guests calling out ‘_ascenseur_’ fifty times a
day, should himself only ever have said ‘_accenseur_’.³ Certain things
about this liftboy were extremely irritating: whatever I might have said
to him, he would break in with a phrase, ‘I’ll say!’ or ‘Imagine!’,
which seemed to signify either that my remark was so self-evident that
anyone at all might have thought of it, or else to transfer its merits
on to himself as if it were he who had drawn my attention to it. ‘I’ll
say!’ and ‘Imagine!’, exclaimed with the utmost vigour, came to his lips
every two minutes, for things that would never have entered his head,
which so irritated me that I at once began saying the opposite, to show
him he understood not the first thing. But to my second assertion,
incompatible though it was with the first, he would still answer: ‘I’ll
say!’ or ‘Imagine!’, as if these words were inevitable. I found it hard
to forgive him also for employing certain terms of his trade, which
would for that reason have been perfectly suitable if used literally,
only in a figurative sense, which lent them a somewhat puerile
pretension to wit, the verb ‘to pedal’ for example. He never used it
when he had run an errand by bicycle. But if, on foot, he had had to
hurry so as to be on time, to signify that he had walked quickly, he
would say: ‘You can imagine how I pedalled!’ The liftboy was on the
small side, of poor physique and somewhat ugly. Which did not stop him,
whenever you mentioned a young man who was tall, slim and fine-featured,
from saying: ‘Oh, yes, I know, one who’s just my height.’ One day, when
I was waiting for an answer from him, as someone had been coming up the
stairs, at the sound of footsteps I had in my impatience opened the door
of my room, to see a _chasseur_ as handsome as Endymion, with features
of an unbelievable perfection, who had come for a lady whom I did not
know. Once the liftboy had returned, on telling him with what impatience
I had been awaiting his answer, I told how I had thought it was him
coming upstairs but that it was a _chasseur_ from the Hôtel de
Normandie. ‘Oh, yes, I know the one, he said, there’s only one, a boy my
own size. To look at, too, he’s so like me we could be mistaken for one
another, you’d say he was my twin.’ Finally, he liked appearing to have
understood everything right from the start, which meant that, as soon as
you were advising him of something, he would say: ‘Yes, yes, yes, yes,
yes, I understand perfectly’, with a decisiveness and an air of
intelligence that took me in for a time; but, as we get to know them,
people are like a metal plunged into some corrosive mixture, and can be
seen gradually losing their good qualities (as sometimes their defects).
Before giving him my instructions, I saw that he had left the door open;
I pointed this out, I was afraid we might be overheard; he condescended
to my wishes and returned, having reduced the opening. ‘That’s so as to
please you. But there’s no one on this floor any more but the two of
us.’ I immediately heard one, then two, then three people go past. This
annoyed me because of the possible indiscretion, but above all because I
could see that it in no way surprised him but was simply the normal
traffic. ‘Yes, it’s the chambermaid from next door going to fetch her
things. Yes, it’s not of any importance, it’s the _sommelier_ bringing
up his keys. No, no, it’s nothing, you can speak, it’s my associate
who’s going on duty.’ And since the reasons that all these people had
for going past did not lessen my annoyance that they might overhear me,
at my formal order, he went, not to close the door, which was beyond the
capacities of this cyclist who longed for a ‘motorbike’, but to push it
a little further to. ‘There, now we’ll be nice and quiet.’ We were so
much so that an American woman entered and withdrew, apologizing for
having mistaken the room. ‘You’re to bring the girl back here to me,’ I
said to him, after myself slamming the door with all my strength (which
brought another _chasseur_ to make sure no windows were open). ‘I’m sure
you can remember: Mlle Albertine Simonet. It’s on the envelope in any
case. All you need do is tell her it’s from me. She’ll come very
willingly, I added, to encourage him not to humiliate me too much. –
I’ll say! – No, on the contrary, it’s by no means a matter of course
that she’ll come willingly. It’s very inconvenient to come here from
Berneville. – I understand! – You’ll tell her to come with you. – Yes,
yes, yes, yes, I understand perfectly,’ he replied in that precise,
quick tone of voice that had long since ceased to create a ‘good
impression’ on me because I knew it was more or less automatic and
concealed beneath its seeming decisiveness much vagueness and stupidity.
‘What time will you be back? – It’ll not take me very long,’ said the
‘lift’, who, taking to an extreme the rule, laid down by Bélise, of
avoiding the recidivism of adding a _pas_ to a _ne_, always contented
himself with a single negative.⁴ ‘I can very easily go there. In fact,
time off was cancelled this afternoon because there was a private party
of twenty for lunch. And it was my turn to be off this afternoon. It’s
only fair if I’m out for a bit this evening. I’ll take my bike with me.
That way I’ll be quick.’ And an hour later he arrived, saying:
‘Monsieur’s had to wait indeed, but the young lady’s come with me. She’s
downstairs. – Ah, thank you, the hall-porter won’t be angry with me? –
Monsieur Paul? Doesn’t know where I been even. Even the door head had
nothing to say.’ But once when I had said to him: ‘You absolutely must
bring her back here,’ he said to me with a smile: ‘You know I couldn’t
find her. She’s not there. And I couldn’t stay longer; I was afraid of
being like my associate who was moved from the hotel’ (for the ‘lift’,
who talked of rejoining a profession when one is joining it for the
first time: ‘I’d be very happy to rejoin the post office’, by way of
compensation, either so as to soften the blow if it was he who was
involved, or else to insinuate it in a more mealy-mouthed and perfidious
way if it involved someone else, suppressed the ‘re-’ and said ‘I know
he was moved.’). It was not out of malice that he smiled, but on account
of his shyness. He thought he could lessen the significance of his lapse
by treating it as a joke. Similarly, while he had said ‘_You know_ I
couldn’t find her,’ it was not because he in fact believed I knew that
already. On the contrary, he was in no doubt that I did not know and was
above all alarmed. Thus he said ‘you know’ so as to spare himself the
agonies he would go through in uttering the words intended to inform me
of it. We should never lose our tempers with those who, when we catch
them out, start sniggering. They do so, not because they are making fun,
but are fearful that we may be displeased. Let us evince great
compassion, show great gentleness to those who laugh. Like a veritable
stroke, the ‘lift’s’ agitation had produced not only an apoplectic
redness but a deterioration in his vocabulary, become suddenly familiar.
He ended by explaining that Albertine was not in Epreville, that she
would be back only at nine o’clock and that if sometimes, which meant by
any chance, she were to return sooner, she would be given the message,
and she would at all events be with me before one a.m.

It was not even on that evening, however, that my cruel mistrust began
to take shape. No, to have out with it and although the episode took
place only several weeks later, it was born of a remark of Cottard’s.
Albertine and her friends had wanted on that particular day to drag me
along to the casino in Incarville and, as luck would have it, I would
not have joined them there (wishing to go and pay a call on Mme
Verdurin, who had invited me a number of times), had I not been held up
in Incarville itself by the tram breaking down, which was going to take
some time to put right. Walking up and down while waiting for them to
finish, I suddenly found myself face to face with Doctor Cottard, who
had come to Incarville for a consultation. I hesitated almost to wish
him good day as he had not replied to any of my letters. But
friendliness does not manifest itself in the same fashion in everyone.
Not having been constrained by his upbringing to the same fixed rules of
savoir-vivre as members of society, Cottard was full of good intentions
of which we were unaware, which we denied, up until the day when he had
the opportunity to display them. He apologized, had indeed received my
letters, had signalled my presence to the Verdurins, who had a strong
desire to see me and to whom he advised me to go. He even wanted to take
me there that same evening, since he would be catching the little
branch-line train again to go and dine there. As I was wavering and as
he still had a little time before his train, the breakdown going to be
quite prolonged, I made him enter the little casino, one of those that I
had found so sad on the evening of my first arrival, full now of the
tumult of young girls who, for want of male partners, were dancing
together. Andrée came glissading up to me, I was anticipating leaving
again in a moment with Cottard to go to the Verdurins’, when I refused
his offer once and for all, overcome by too keen a desire to remain with
Albertine. For the fact was I had just heard her laughing. And that
laugh at once summoned up the pink carnations, the perfumed walls
against which it seemed to have just brushed and from which, pungent,
sensual and revealing as the scent of geraniums, it seemed to be
transporting with it a few almost ponderable, irritant and secret
particles.

One of the girls whom I did not know sat down at the piano, and Andrée
asked Albertine to waltz with her. Happy, in this little casino, to
reflect that I was going to remain with these girls, I pointed out to
Cottard how well they danced. But he, from the specialized perspective
of a doctor, and with his faulty upbringing, which took no account of
the fact that I knew these girls, whom he must, however, have seen me
greeting, replied: ‘Yes, but the parents are very unwise who let their
daughters pick up such habits. I certainly wouldn’t allow my own to come
here. Are they pretty anyway? I can’t make out their features. There,
look,’ he added, pointing to Albertine and Andrée, who were waltzing
slowly, pressed one against the other, ‘I’ve forgotten my eyeglass and I
can’t see properly, but they’re certainly at the height of arousal. It’s
not sufficiently well known that it’s chiefly through the breasts that
women experience it. And look, theirs are touching, completely.’ Indeed,
those of Andrée and of Albertine had not ceased to be in contact. I do
not know whether they heard or guessed at Cottard’s observation, but
they drew slightly apart while continuing to waltz. At that moment,
Andrée said something to Albertine and the latter laughed, with that
same deep, penetrating laugh I had heard just before. But the
disturbance it brought me this time was more than simply cruel;
Albertine seemed to be demonstrating, to be making Andrée acknowledge,
some secret and voluptuous tremor. It had the ring of the first or last
chords of some unknown celebration. I left again with Cottard, my
thoughts elsewhere as I talked with him, reflecting only at intervals on
the scene I had just witnessed. Not that Cottard’s conversation was
interesting. At that particular moment it had turned sour even because
we had just caught sight of Doctor du Boulbon, who did not see us. He
had come to spend time on the far side of the bay of Balbec, where he
was in great demand. Now, although Cottard was in the habit of declaring
that he did not practise medicine when on holiday, he had hoped to
create for himself a select practice along this coast, to which du
Boulbon found himself forming an obstacle. True, the Balbec doctor could
not trouble Cottard. He was simply a very conscientious doctor who knew
everything and to whom you could not mention the least itch without his
immediately prescribing, in some complex formula, the appropriate
pomade, liniment or lotion. As Marie Gineste put it in her pretty way of
talking, he knew how to ‘charm away’ injuries and sores. But he lacked
distinction. He had in fact caused Cottard some small annoyance. The
latter, since he had been seeking to exchange his professorial chair for
one in therapeutics, had made a special study of toxicants. Toxicants, a
perilous innovation in medicine, serving to rewrite the labels of the
pharmacists, all of whose products are declared to be, contrary to
similar drugs, absolutely non-toxic, or detoxicant even. This is the
fashionable claim; the guarantee that the product has been carefully
antisepticized survives, if only just, at the bottom, in illegible
letters, like the faint vestige of a previous fashion. Toxicants serve
also to reassure the patient, who learns to his delight that his
paralysis is only some passing toxic malaise. Now a Grand-Duke having
come to spend a few days in Balbec, and having a badly swollen eye, he
had sent for Cottard, who, in exchange for a few hundred-franc notes
(the Professor would not put himself out for less), had ascribed the
inflammation to a toxic condition and prescribed a detoxifying
treatment. The swelling did not go down, and the Grand-Duke fell back on
the usual Balbec doctor, who within five minutes had extracted a speck
of dust. The next day all sign of it had gone. A more dangerous rival,
however, was a celebrated specialist in nervous diseases. He was a
red-faced, jovial man, both because his close acquaintance with nervous
collapse did not stop him enjoying the rudest of health but also in
order to reassure his patients by the loud laugh of his ‘good morning’
and his ‘good-bye’, even if his athlete’s arms might later help to slip
the straitjacket on them. All the same, the moment you spoke with him in
company, whether about politics or about literature, he would listen to
you with a benign attentiveness, as if to say: ‘What’s the problem?’,
without pronouncing right away, as though this were a consultation. But
he after all, whatever his gifts, was a specialist. And so the whole of
Cottard’s fury had been transferred on to du Boulbon. For the rest, I
soon left the Professor, the friend of the Verdurins, in order to return
home, promising him I would go and visit them.

The hurt that his remarks concerning Albertine and Andrée had caused me
was profound, but the worst of the pain was not felt by me straight
away, as happens in those cases of poisoning which take effect only
after a certain interval of time.

On the evening when the ‘lift’ had gone to fetch her, Albertine did not
come, despite his assurances. It is true that a person’s attractions are
a less frequent cause of love than some such phrase as: ‘No, this
evening I shan’t be free.’ We pay little heed to those words if we are
with friends; we remain cheerful throughout the evening, we are not
preoccupied by a certain mental picture; during such time it is immersed
in the requisite mixture; on coming home we find the photograph,
developed and perfectly clear. We realize that life is no longer the
life we would have given up for a trifle the day before, for, though we
may continue not to fear death, we no longer dare to contemplate
separation.

At all events, after, not one o’ clock in the morning (the hour the
liftboy had fixed), but three o’ clock, I no longer suffered as in the
old days from feeling the chances of her appearing to be diminishing.
The certainty that she would not now be coming produced a complete calm
in me, a freshness; the night was quite simply a night like so many
others on which I had not seen her, that was the idea from which I
began. And from that moment on, the thought that I would see her the
next day or on other days, standing out against the nothingness that I
had accepted, became sweet to me. Sometimes, on these evenings of
waiting, our anguish is due to some medicament that we have taken.
Wrongly construed by whoever is suffering, he believes he is anxious on
account of she who does not come. Love is born in such a case, like
certain nervous diseases, from the inaccurate explanation of a painful
malaise. An explanation which there is no point in rectifying, at least
where love is concerned, a sentiment which (whatever its cause) is
always erroneous.

The next day, when Albertine wrote that she had only just got back to
Epreville, so had not received my note in time, and would come, with my
permission, to see me that evening, behind the words of her letter, as
behind those she had spoken to me once on the telephone, I thought I
sensed the presence of pleasures, of persons, whom she had preferred to
me. Once again, my whole being was agitated by a painful curiosity to
know what she might have been doing, by the latent love we bear always
within us; I was able to believe for a moment that it was about to
attach me to Albertine, but all that it did was to quiver, there where
it was, and its last murmurs died away without its having started
moving.

During my first stay in Balbec, I misunderstood – and perhaps indeed
Andrée had done as I had – Albertine’s character. I had believed that it
was innocent frivolity on her part if all our entreaties did not succeed
in detaining her and causing her to miss a _garden-party_, a donkey-ride
or a picnic. During my second stay in Balbec, I suspected that that
frivolity was only an appearance, and the _garden-party_ only a screen,
if not an invention. Under various forms, the following episode occurred
(I mean the episode as observed by me, from my side of the glass, which
was by no means transparent, and without my being able to tell what
truth there might be on the other side). Albertine would make me the
most passionate protestations of her affection. She would look at the
time because she was due to go and call on a lady who was ‘at home’, it
seemed, every day at five o’clock in Infreville. Tortured by a suspicion
and feeling anyway unwell, I asked Albertine, I begged her, to stay. It
was impossible (in fact, she could only stay for another five minutes)
because it would annoy the lady in question, who was touchy and not very
welcoming and, said Albertine, a bore. ‘But one can easily miss a visit.
– No, my aunt has taught me politeness has to come first. – But I’ve
seen you be impolite often enough. – That’s not the same thing, this
lady would hold it against me and make trouble for me with my aunt. I’m
already in her bad books rather. She insists I should have been to see
her once at least. – But since she’s “at home” every day.’ Here,
Albertine, feeling she had been ‘cut off’, modified the reason. ‘Of
course she’s “at home” every day. But today I’ve arranged to meet some
friends at her house. That way, we shan’t be so bored. – In that case,
Albertine, you’re preferring this lady and your friends to me, since, in
order not to risk paying a tedious visit, you prefer to leave me on my
own, ill and most unhappy? – I wouldn’t in the least mind the visit
being tedious. But it’s out of devotion to them. I shall bring them back
in my trap. Otherwise, they’d no longer have any means of transport.’ I
pointed out to Albertine that there were trains up until ten o’clock in
the evening, from Infreville. ‘That’s true, but, you know, it’s possible
we shall be asked to stay to dinner. She’s very hospitable. – Well, you
could refuse. – I’d be annoying my aunt again. – Anyway, you can have
dinner and catch the ten o’clock train. – That’s cutting it fine. – Then
I can never go out to dinner and come back by train. But listen,
Albertine, we’re going to do something very simple: I feel that the
fresh air will do me good; since you can’t give this lady up, I’m going
to go with you as far as Infreville. Never fear, I shan’t go as far as
the Tour Elisabeth (the lady’s villa), I shan’t see the lady, nor your
friends.’ Albertine looked as if she had received a terrible blow. She
broke off from speaking. She said that sea bathing had not benefited
her. ‘If my going with you annoys you? – But how can you say that, you
know my greatest pleasure is going out with you.’ There had been an
abrupt change of tack. ‘Since we’re going to go somewhere together, she
said, why shouldn’t we go the other side of Balbec, we could have dinner
together. It would be so nice. Basically, the coastline there’s much
prettier. I’m beginning to get fed up with Infreville and all these
little places the colour of spinach. – But your aunt’s friend will be
angry if you don’t go and see her. – Well, she’ll get unangry again. –
No, we shouldn’t make people angry. – But she won’t even notice, she’s
“at home” every day; whether I go there tomorrow, or the day after, in a
week’s time, a fortnight’s time, that’ll meet the bill. – And your
friends? – Oh, they’ve left me in the lurch enough times. It’s certainly
my turn. – But in the direction you’re proposing, there’s no train after
nine o’clock. – Well, what of it? Nine is ideal. Besides, we should
never let the problem of getting back stand in our way. We can always
find a cart, or a bike, failing which we’ve got our legs. – Always find,
Albertine, you’re getting carried away! The Infreville direction, where
the little wooden stations are so close to one other, yes. But the
opposite direction, it’s not the same. – Even that way. I promise I’ll
get you back safe and sound.’ I sensed that Albertine was giving up on
my account something she had arranged that she did not want to tell me
about, and that there was someone who would be as unhappy as I had been.
Finding that what she had wanted was not possible, since I wanted to go
with her, she gave it up unhesitatingly. She knew it was not
irremediable. For, like all the women who have several things in their
lives, she could rely for support on what never weakens: doubt and
jealousy. Admittedly, she was not trying to excite them, on the
contrary. But those in love are so suspicious that they instantly sniff
out a falsehood. So that Albertine, being no better than anyone else,
knew from experience (without guessing in the very least that she owed
it to jealousy) that she would always be sure to see again the people
she had left in the lurch one evening. The person unknown whom she had
given up for my sake would suffer, would love her the more (Albertine
did not know this was the reason), and so as not to go on suffering
would return to her of his own accord, as I would have done. But I
wanted neither to cause pain, nor to tire myself out, nor to enter on to
the terrible path of inquiry, of a multiform, innumerable surveillance.
‘No, Albertine, I don’t want to spoil your pleasure, go to your lady in
Infreville, or at any rate to the person she’s a pseudonym for, it’s all
the same to me. The real reason why I’m not going with you, is that you
don’t want it, that the excursion you’d be making with me isn’t the one
you wanted to make, the proof of which is that you’ve contradicted
yourself more than five times without noticing.’ Poor Albertine was
afraid that her contradictions, which she had not noticed, might have
been more serious, not knowing exactly what lies she had told: ‘It’s
very possible I contradicted myself. The sea air takes away all my
powers of reason. I’m forever saying one name instead of another.’ And
(which proved to me that she would not now have needed many sweet
affirmations for me to believe her) I experienced the pain of a wound,
on hearing this admission of what I had only feebly assumed. ‘All right,
it’s agreed, I’m going,’ she said in a tragic voice, not without looking
at the time so as to see whether she was late or not for the other
person, now that I had furnished her with the pretext for not spending
the evening with me. ‘You’re so unkind. I change everything so as to
spend a nice evening with you and it’s you who don’t want it, and you
accuse me of lying. I’ve never seen you so cruel before. The sea will be
my grave. I shall never see you again. (My heart beat faster at these
words although I was certain she would be back the next day, which is
what happened). I shall drown myself, I shall throw myself into the
water. – Like Sappho.⁵ – Yet another insult; you don’t only have doubts
about what I say but about what I do. – But little one, I had no such
intention, I swear, you know that Sappho hurled herself into the sea. –
Yes you did, you don’t have any confidence in me.’ She saw from the
clock that it was twenty to; she was afraid of missing what it was she
had to do, and selecting the briefest of farewells (which she apologized
for as it happens by coming to see me the following day; on that
particular following day the other person probably was not free), she
made her escape at a run, crying ‘Farewell for ever,’ wearing a
heartbroken expression. And perhaps she was heartbroken. For knowing
what she was doing at that moment better than I did, at once more severe
and more indulgent towards herself than I was to her, perhaps all the
same she felt a doubt that I might not make her welcome after the way
she had left me. I think that she cared for me, to the point where the
other person was more jealous than me.

A few days later, in Balbec, when we were in the ballroom of the casino,
Bloch’s sister and cousin came in, both of whom were by now very pretty,
but whom I no longer acknowledged because of my friends, for the younger
of the two, the cousin, was living quite openly with the actress whose
acquaintance she had made during my first stay. Andrée, allusion having
been made to this under her breath, said to me: ‘Oh, I’m like Albertine
about that, there’s nothing the two of us find more disgusting.’ As for
Albertine, starting to talk with me on the sofa where we were sitting,
she had turned her back on the two disreputable girls. Yet I had
observed that prior to this movement, just as Mlle Bloch and her cousin
had made their appearance, there had come into my loved one’s eyes that
sudden and profound attentiveness that sometimes lent this mischievous
girl’s face a serious, even solemn expression, and left her looking sad
afterwards. But Albertine had at once turned her gaze, still oddly
immobile and thoughtful, back on to me. Mlle Bloch and her cousin having
finally gone off, after giving a very loud laugh and uttering unseemly
shouts, I asked Albertine whether the small, fair-haired one (she who
was the girl-friend of the actress) was not the same girl who had the
day before won the prize in the floral carriage race. ‘Oh, I don’t know,
said Albertine, has one of them got fair hair? I have to tell you, they
don’t greatly interest me, I’ve never looked at them. Has one of them
got fair hair?’ she asked her three friends, with a detached,
questioning look. Applied as it was to people whom Albertine met every
day on the esplanade, this ignorance struck me as too extreme not to
have been put on. ‘They don’t appear to be looking at us much, either,’
I said to Albertine, perhaps on the hypothesis, though I did not as yet
consciously entertain it, that Albertine liked women, so as to remove
any regret on her part by demonstrating to her that she had not
attracted the attention of these women, and that, generally speaking,
even the most depraved of them do not usually concern themselves with
young girls whom they do not know. ‘They didn’t look at us? replied
Albertine unthinkingly, they did nothing else the whole time. – But you
can’t know that, I said, you had your back to them. – Well, what about
that?’ she replied, indicating, set into the wall facing us, a large
mirror that I had failed to notice, and on which I now realized that,
even while she was speaking to me, my loved one had not ceased to fix
her beautiful, much preoccupied eyes.

From the day when Cottard had gone with me into the little Incarville
casino, without sharing the opinion he had given voice to, I no longer
saw Albertine in the same light; the sight of her produced anger in me.
I had myself changed so much that she seemed other. I had ceased to look
kindly on her; in her presence, or out of her presence if it might get
repeated to her, I spoke of her in the most wounding fashion. There were
truces, however. One day I learnt that Albertine and Andrée had both of
them accepted an invitation to Elstir’s. Not doubting that this was with
a view to being able to amuse themselves on the way back like
schoolgirls, by taking off girls of the disreputable sort, and derive in
doing so an unconfessed, virginal pleasure that would wring my heart,
without any announcement, in order to inconvenience them and to deprive
Albertine of the pleasure on which she was counting, I arrived at
Elstir’s unexpectedly. But I found only Andrée there. Albertine had
chosen another day, when her aunt was due to go there. So I told myself
that Cottard must have been mistaken; the favourable impression produced
in me by Andrée’s being present without her friend did not go away and
fostered in me a gentler disposition in regard to Albertine. But this
lasted no longer than the fragile good health of those delicate
individuals liable to temporary improvements, but in whom the merest
nothing suffices to bring about a relapse. Albertine had incited Andrée
to games that, without going very far, were not perhaps altogether
innocent; finding this suspicion painful, in the end I discarded it.
Hardly was I cured before it was reborn in another form. I had just seen
Andrée, in one of those graceful movements that were peculiar to her,
lay her head coaxingly on Albertine’s shoulder and kiss her on the neck,
half closing her eyes; or else they had exchanged a quick glance; a
comment had escaped someone who had seen them alone together on the way
to bathe, trivial incidents such as habitually float in the ambient
atmosphere, where the majority of people absorb them all day long
without their health suffering or their mood changing for the worse, but
which are morbid and generative of fresh pain for someone so
predisposed. Sometimes even, without my having seen Albertine again, and
without anyone having spoken of her to me, I rediscovered in my memory
an attitude of Albertine’s in the company of Gisèle which I had thought
innocent at the time; it was enough now to destroy the state of calm I
had been able to recover, I no longer needed to go out of doors to
breathe in dangerous germs, I had, as Cottard would have said,
intoxicated myself. I thought then about all that I had learned of
Swann’s love for Odette, and of the way in which Swann had been made a
fool of all his life. Fundamentally, if I try to think about it, the
hypothesis which led me little by little to construct Albertine’s whole
character, and to interpret painfully each moment of a life I was unable
to control in its entirety, was the memory, the _idée fixe_, of the
character of Mme Swann, such as I had been told that it was like. These
accounts helped to ensure that in future my imagination played the game
of supposing that, instead of being a good girl, Albertine might have
the same immorality, the same capacity for deception, as a former whore,
and I thought of all the suffering that would have awaited me in that
event had I ever had to love her.

One day, in front of the Grand-Hôtel, where we had gathered on the
esplanade, I had just directed the harshest and most humiliating words
at Albertine, and Rosemonde said: ‘Oh, how you’ve changed towards her,
at one time she was all that mattered, it was she who called the tune,
now she’s only good to be fed to the dogs.’ In order to make my attitude
towards Albertine even more conspicuous, I was in the midst of saying
all manner of friendly things to Andrée, who, though she might be
afflicted with the same vice, seemed more excusable because she was
unwell and neurasthenic, when we saw emerge, at a gentle trot, into the
street perpendicular to the esplanade on the corner of which we were
standing, Mme de Cambremer’s calash and pair. The First President, who
was at that moment advancing towards us, leaped out of the way when he
recognized the carriage, so as not to be seen in our company; then, when
he thought that the Marquise’s glances might be about to meet his own,
he bowed and gave an immense sweep of his hat. But the carriage, instead
of continuing, as had seemed likely, along the rue de la Mer, vanished
behind the entrance to the hotel. It was a good ten minutes after this
that the ‘lift’ arrived, all out of breath, to warn me: ‘It’s the
Marquise de Camembert who’s come just to see Monsieur. I went up to the
room, I looked in the reading-room, I couldn’t find Monsieur. Luckily, I
had the idea of looking on the beach.’ Hardly had he concluded his
narration before, followed by her daughter-in-law and by a very
ceremonious gentleman, the Marquise advanced towards me, coming probably
from a matinée or tea-party in the vicinity, and bowed down under the
weight, not so much of the years as of the host of luxurious articles in
which she thought it more friendly and more befitting to her rank to be
covered so as to appear as ‘dressed-up’ as possible to those she had
come to see. It was, in short, at the hotel, that ‘disembarkation’ of
the Cambremers which my grandmother had once so much dreaded when she
wanted Legrandin not to be aware that we would perhaps be going to
Balbec. Then Mama would laugh at the fears inspired by an event she
considered impossible. And yet now at last it had come about, but by
another route and without Legrandin having had any part in it. ‘Can I
stay if I don’t disturb you? Albertine asked me (in whose eyes there
remained, put there by the cruel things I had just been saying to her, a
few tears that I observed without appearing to see them, and not without
rejoicing), I might have something to say to you.’ A hat with feathers,
itself surmounted by a sapphire pin, had been set down anyhow on Mme de
Cambremer’s wig, like an insignia the display of which is necessary but
sufficient, its placing of no importance, its elegance conventional, its
immobility useless. Despite the heat, the good lady had put on a
jet-black mantlet resembling a dalmatic, on top of which there hung an
ermine stole, the wearing of which seemed to relate not to the
temperature or the season, but to the nature of the ceremony. And on Mme
de Cambremer’s bosom there hung a baron’s coronet linked to a short
chain in the manner of a pectoral cross. The gentleman was a celebrated
barrister from Paris, of a nobiliary family, who had come to spend three
days with the Cambremers. He was one of those men of a professional
experience so complete as to cause them somewhat to look down on their
profession and who say, for example: ‘I know I argue well in court, so I
no longer get any amusement from arguing’, or: ‘Operating no longer
interests me; I know I operate well.’ As intelligent men, and as
_artists_, they see, resplendent about a maturity handsomely endowed by
success, the ‘intelligence’ and the ‘artistic’ nature that their
colleagues acknowledge and which confers on them a rough approximation
to taste and discernment. They develop a passion for the paintings not
of a great artist, but of an artist of great distinction nonetheless, to
purchasing whose works they devote the large income that their career
procures for them. Le Sidaner⁶ was the artist selected by the friend of
the Cambremers, who was in fact very agreeable. He talked well about
books, the books not of the true masters, however, but of those who have
mastered themselves. The one troublesome defect that this _amateur_
displayed was that he consistently employed certain ready-made
expressions, such as ‘for the most part’, which lent something both
important and incomplete to what he wished to talk about. Mme de
Cambremer had taken advantage, she told me, of a matinée that some
friends of hers had been giving that day near Balbec to come and see me,
as she had promised Robert de Saint-Loup. ‘You know he’s due shortly to
come and spend a few days locally. His uncle Charlus is staying in the
country at his sister-in-law’s, the Duchesse de Luxembourg, and M. de
Saint-Loup will take the opportunity both to go and greet his aunt and
to revisit his old regiment, where he is greatly loved, greatly
esteemed. We often entertain officers, who all praise him to the skies.
It would be so nice if you were to do us the pleasure of coming both of
you to Féterne.’ I introduced Albertine and her friends to her. Mme de
Cambremer named us to her daughter-in-law. The latter, so glacial
towards the petty nobility with whom the neighbourhood of Féterne forced
her to associate, so full of reserve for fear of being compromised, held
out her hand to me on the contrary with a radiant smile, in a place of
safety and delighted as she was, faced by a friend of Robert de
Saint-Loup’s, and one whom the latter, preserving a greater social
finesse than he liked people to see, had told her was a close friend of
the Guermantes. Thus, in contrast to her mother-in-law, Mme de Cambremer
had two infinitely different forms of politeness. It was at the very
most the first form, distant and intolerable, that she would have
accorded me had I met her through her brother Legrandin. But for a
friend of the Guermantes she was all smiles. The most comfortable room
in the hotel in which to receive people was the reading-room, in the old
days a very terrible place into which I now entered ten times a day,
re-emerging freely, as my own master, like those lunatics, little
affected and so long resident in the asylum that the doctor has
entrusted them with the key. Thus I offered to take Mme de Cambremer
there. And because this saloon no longer filled me with shyness nor held
any attraction for me, since the faces of things change for us just as
those of people do, it was without feeling flustered that I made the
suggestion. But she refused, preferring to remain out of doors, and we
sat down in the open air, on the hotel terrace. There I found and
rescued a volume of Mme de Sévigné that Mama had not had time to take
with her in her precipitate flight, when she heard that I had visitors.
She dreaded these invasions by strangers as much as my grandmother had
and, for fear of no longer being able to escape if she let herself be
hemmed around, she made her escape with a rapidity that always led my
father and me to make fun of her. In her hand, Mme de Cambremer held,
together with the handle of a sunshade, several embroidered bags, a
tidy, a gold purse from which hung ropes of garnets, and a lace
handkerchief. It struck me that it would have been more convenient for
her to put them down on a chair; but I sensed it would be improper and
pointless to ask her to abandon the regalia of her pastoral rounds and
her worldly ministry. We gazed at the calm sea, where stray gulls
floated like white petals. Because of the level of simple ‘medium’ to
which worldly conversation reduces us, and also our desire to please
with the help, not of qualities of which we are ourselves unaware, but
of what we believe must be prized by those we are with, I began
instinctively to talk to Mme de Cambremer, _née_ Legrandin, in the
manner in which her brother might have done. ‘They have, I said,
referring to the gulls, the whiteness and stillness of water-lilies.’
And indeed, they appeared to be offering an inert target to the little
waves that were rocking them, to the point where these, by contrast,
seemed, in their pursuit, animated by some purpose, to have taken on
life. The dowager Marquise did not weary of hymning the superb view of
the sea that we got in Balbec, and envied me it, she who, at La
Raspelière (where it so happens she was not living that year), could see
the waves only from a long way off. She had two peculiar habits that
derived at once from her exalted love of the arts (of music above all)
and from her dental inadequacy. Whenever she talked aesthetics, her
salivary glands, like those of certain animals in the rutting season,
entered on a phase of hypersecretion such that the old lady’s toothless
mouth allowed a few droplets whose rightful place this was not to come
from the corners of her faintly moustachioed lips. She would at once
swallow them down again with a deep sigh, like someone recovering their
breath. And then, were the beauty of the music too much for her, in her
enthusiasm she would raise her arms and proffer a few summary judgments,
energetically masticated and coming, if need be, from the nose. Now, it
had never occurred to me that the commonplace beach of Balbec might
indeed offer a ‘sea-view’, and Mme de Cambremer’s simple words changed
my ideas where that was concerned. In return, as I now told her, I had
always heard people extolling the unique panorama from La Raspelière,
situated at the top of the hill, and where, in a large drawing-room with
two fireplaces, one whole row of windows looks out, at the foot of the
gardens, between the foliage, on to the sea as far as Balbec and beyond,
and the other row on to the valley. ‘How kind of you and how well you
put it: the sea between the foliage. It’s ravishing, it’s like… a fan.’
And I sensed, from a deep breath intended to catch the saliva and dry
the moustache, that the compliment was genuine. But the Marquise _née_
Legrandin remained unmoved in order to show her disdain not for my words
but for those of her mother-in-law. She did not merely despise the
latter’s intelligence, moreover, she deplored her affability, forever
afraid that people might not have a sufficiently high regard for the
Cambremers. ‘And what a pretty name, I said. One would love to know the
origin of all these names. – In the case of that one, I can tell you,
the old lady answered quietly. It’s a family home, of my grandmother
Arrachepel, it’s not an illustrious family, but a very good and very
ancient provincial family. – What, not illustrious? her daughter-in-law
broke in curtly. A whole stained-glass window in Bayeux Cathedral is
filled with its arms, and the principal church of Avranches contains
their funerary monuments. If these old names amuse you, you’ve come one
year too late. We had appointed to the living at Criquetot, despite all
the difficulties there are in changing dioceses, the dean of a place
where I myself have estates, a long way from here, in Combray, where the
good priest felt he was becoming neurasthenic. Unfortunately, the sea
air didn’t succeed at his great age; his neurasthenia increased and he
went back to Combray. But while he was our neighbour, he amused himself
by going to consult all the old charters, and he wrote a rather
intriguing little booklet on the local place-names. That gave him a
taste for it, moreover, for it seems he’s occupying his closing years
writing a large book on Combray and its surroundings. I shall send you
his booklet on the region around Féterne. It’s a labour of love. You’ll
read the most interesting things in it about our old Raspelière, about
which my mother-in-law speaks much too modestly. – At all events, this
year, replied the dowager Mme de Cambremer, La Raspelière is no longer
ours and doesn’t belong to me. But I sense you’re a painter at heart;
you ought to draw, and I would so like to show you Féterne, which is
much better than La Raspelière.’ For now that the Cambremers had let
this last-named house to the Verdurins, its commanding position had
abruptly ceased to appear what it had been for them during all these
years, that is to say as offering the advantage, unique in the region,
of having a view both out to sea and over the valley, and had suddenly –
and after the event – presented them in return with the inconvenience
that you had always to climb and descend in order to get there and then
come away again. In short, you might have thought that if Mme de
Cambremer had rented it out, this was less in order to increase her
revenues than to rest her horses. And she declared herself overjoyed at
finally being able all the time to possess the sea from so close to, at
Féterne, she who, for so long, ignoring the two months she used to spend
there, had only seen it from high up and as if in a panorama. ‘I am
discovering it at my age, she said, and how I enjoy it! It does me a
world of good! I’d let La Raspelière for nothing so as to be constrained
to live at Féterne.’

‘To get back on to more interesting matters, resumed Legrandin’s sister,
who addressed the old Marquise as “Mother” but had adopted an insolent
manner towards her over the years, you were talking of water-lilies: I
imagine you know those that Claude Monet has painted. What genius! It
interests me all the more because close to Combray, the place where I
told you I owned land…’ But she preferred not to speak too much about
Combray. ‘Oh, that’s surely the series we heard about from Elstir, the
greatest of contemporary painters, exclaimed Albertine, who had said
nothing hitherto. – Oh, one can tell Mademoiselle loves the arts,’
exclaimed Mme de Cambremer, sucking back a jet of saliva as she drew a
deep breath. ‘You will permit me to prefer Le Sidaner, Mademoiselle,’
said the lawyer, smiling with the air of a connoisseur. And, as he had
once appreciated, or seen appreciated, certain of Elstir’s ‘audacities’,
he added: ‘Elstir was gifted, he was almost part of the avant-garde
even, but for some reason or other he didn’t keep up, he has wasted his
life.’ Mme de Cambremer came down in favour of the lawyer so far as
Elstir was concerned, but, much to her guest’s chagrin, ranked Monet
with Le Sidaner. It cannot be said that she was stupid; she overflowed
with an intelligence that I sensed was of not the slightest use to me.
The sun just then getting lower, the seagulls were now yellow, like the
water-lilies in another canvas of that same series by Monet. I said that
I knew it and (continuing to imitate the language of the brother whose
name I had not as yet dared to cite) I added that it was a pity that she
had not thought rather of coming the day before, for, at that same hour,
she would have been able to admire a light out of Poussin. Confronted by
some Normandy squireen, not known to the Guermantes, telling her that
she should have come the day before, Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin would no
doubt have stiffened with offence. But I could well have been more
familiar still and she would have been all fond, melting sweetness; in
the warmth of that lovely late afternoon I could gather honey as I liked
in the great honeycomb that Mme de Cambremer so seldom was and which
took the place of the petits-fours I had not thought to hand round. But
the name of Poussin, without taking away from the amenableness of the
society woman, aroused the protests of the dilettante. On hearing that
name, Mme de Cambremer gave vent six times, with scarcely any interval
in between, to that brief clicking of the tongue against the lips which
serves to signify to a child who is in the midst of doing something
silly, that he is both at fault for having started and forbidden to
continue. ‘In heaven’s name, after a painter like Monet, who’s quite
simply a genius, don’t go and name an untalented old hack like Poussin.
I tell you straight out that I consider him the most crashing of bores.
There you are, but I can’t call that painting. Monet, Degas, Manet, yes,
they’re painters! It’s very odd,’ she added, fixing a rapt and searching
gaze on some vague point in space where she could perceive her own
thought, ‘it’s very odd, at one time I preferred Manet. Nowadays, I
still admire Manet, naturally, but I think I perhaps prefer Monet even
more. Oh, the cathedrals!’ She put as much scrupulousness as
self-satisfaction into informing me of the direction in which her taste
had evolved. And you had the sense that the phases through which that
taste had passed were no less important, as she saw it, than the
different manners of Monet himself. I had, moreover, no cause to feel
flattered that she should have been confiding her admirations to me,
for, even when faced by the most narrow-minded of provincial ladies, she
could not go five minutes without feeling the need to confess them. When
a noble lady from Avranches, who would have been incapable of telling
Mozart from Wagner, said in front of Mme de Cambremer: ‘There was
nothing new on of any interest during our stay in Paris, we did go once
to the Opéra Comique, they were doing _Pelléas et Mélisande_, it’s
ghastly,’ Mme de Cambremer not only seethed with anger but felt the need
to exclaim: ‘On the contrary, it’s a small masterpiece’ and to ‘argue
the matter’. This perhaps was a habit from Combray, picked up from the
sisters of my grandmother, who called it ‘fighting the good fight’, and
who loved dinner-parties where they knew, week after week, that they
would have to defend their gods against the Philistines. Thus, Mme de
Cambremer liked to ‘get the blood coursing’ by ‘squabbling’ about art,
as others about politics. She took the side of Debussy as she would have
done that of one of her women friends whose conduct had come under fire.
Yet she must certainly have realized that when she said: ‘Not at all,
it’s a small masterpiece’, she could never improvise, in whoever she was
putting in their place, that whole progression in artistic culture at
whose conclusion they might have reached agreement without any need to
argue. ‘I shall have to ask Le Sidaner what he thinks of Poussin, the
lawyer said to me. He’s a quiet one, keeps himself to himself, but I
shall know how to draw him out.’

‘Anyway, Mme de Cambremer went on, I have a horror of sunsets, so very
romantic, so very operatic. That’s the reason why I detest my
mother-in-law’s house, with its plants from the Midi. You’ll see, it
looks like a park in Monte-Carlo. That’s the reason why I like your
shore better. It’s sadder, more genuine; there’s a little lane from
where you can’t see the sea. On rainy days, there’s nothing but mud,
it’s a world of its own. It’s like in Venice, I detest the Grand Canal
and I know of nothing more affecting than the little alley-ways. It’s a
question of ambiance anyway. – But,’ I said to her, sensing that the one
way of rehabilitating Poussin in Mme de Cambremer’s eyes was to let her
know that he was back in fashion, ‘M. Degas assures us that he knows of
nothing more beautiful than the Poussins at Chantilly.⁷ – Oh yes? I
don’t know the ones at Chantilly, said Mme de Cambremer, who did not
want to be of a different opinion to Degas, but I can talk about those
in the Louvre, which are horrors. – Those, too, he admires enormously. –
I shall have to look at them again. It’s all a bit old in my head,’ she
replied after a moment’s silence and as if the favourable judgment she
would certainly soon be delivering on Poussin must depend, not on the
news I had just conveyed to her, but on the supplementary and this time
definitive examination to which she was relying on subjecting the
Poussins in the Louvre so as to facilitate the reversing of her verdict.
Contenting myself with what was the beginning of a retraction since, if
she did not yet admire the Poussins, she had adjourned for further
deliberation, and so as not to leave her any longer on the rack, I told
her mother-in-law what a lot I had heard about the admirable flowers at
Féterne. Modestly, she spoke of the small mixed garden she had at the
back into which, by pushing open a door, she went in the mornings in her
dressing-gown to feed her peacocks, to look for new-laid eggs, and to
pick zinnias or roses, which, by providing an edging of flowers along
her table runner for the _oeufs à la crème_ or the fried fish, reminded
her of her garden paths. ‘It’s true we have lots of roses, she said, our
rose garden is almost too close to our living quarters, there are days
when it gives me a headache. It’s more agreeable from the terrace at La
Raspelière, where the wind brings you the smell of the roses, but not so
heady.’ I turned to the daughter-in-law: ‘It’s straight out of
_Pelléas_, I said, to satisfy her liking for modernism, the smell of the
roses coming all the way up to the terraces. It’s so strong in the score
that, because I get both hay-fever and rose-fever, it made me sneeze
each time I heard that scene. – What a masterpiece _Pelléas_ is!
exclaimed Mme de Cambremer, I simply adore it’; and drawing closer, with
the gestures of a female savage seeking to have her way with me, and
making use of her fingers to pick out imaginary notes, she began humming
something that I supposed for her represented Pelléas’s farewell,
keeping on with a vehement insistence as though it were of importance
that Mme de Cambremer should remind me of that scene at this moment, or
rather perhaps demonstrate that she remembered it. ‘I think it’s even
more beautiful than _Parsifal_, she added, because in _Parsifal_ the
most beautiful things have had a certain halo of melodic phrases added
to them, obsolete therefore because melodic. – I know you are a great
musician, Madame, I said to the dowager. I’d very much like to hear
you.’ Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin looked at the sea in order not to take
part in the conversation. Considering that what her mother-in-law liked
was not music, she considered the gift she was recognized as possessing,
purported according to her, but most remarkable in point of fact, as a
virtuosity of no interest. It is true that Chopin’s one surviving pupil
had declared, rightly, that the Master’s way of playing, his ‘feeling’,
had been handed down, through her, only to Mme de Cambremer, but to play
like Chopin was far from being a commendation for the sister of
Legrandin, who despised nobody so much as the Polish musician. ‘Oh,
they’re flying away!’ exclaimed Albertine, pointing to the seagulls
which, ridding themselves for a moment of their floral incognito, were
rising as one towards the sun. ‘_Leurs ailes de géants les empêchent de
marcher_,’⁸ said Mme de Cambremer, confusing the seagulls with
albatrosses. ‘I’m very fond of them, I saw some in Amsterdam, said
Albertine. They can smell the sea, they come and sniff it even through
the paving in the streets. – Oh, you’ve been in Holland, do you know the
Ver Meers?’ Mme de Cambremer asked imperiously, in the tone of voice in
which she might have said ‘Do you know the Guermantes?’, for snobbery
does not change its accent in changing its object. Albertine answered
no; she thought they were living people. But it did not show. ‘I’d be
very happy to play something for you, Mme de Cambremer said to me. But
you know, I only play things that no longer interest your generation. I
was brought up to worship Chopin,’ she said in a low voice, for she was
fearful of her daughter-in-law and knew that the latter regarded Chopin
as not being music, so that to play him well or to play him badly were
expressions devoid of sense. She acknowledged that her mother-in-law had
good technique, and performed the virtuoso passages to perfection.
‘They’ll never get me to say she’s a musician,’ ended Mme de
Cambremer-Legrandin. Because she saw herself as ‘advanced’ and (in art
only) ‘never far enough to the left’, as she put it, she imagined that
music not only progresses, but does so along a single line, and that
Debussy was some sort of super-Wagner, a little more advanced even than
Wagner. She had not realized that, if Debussy was not as independent of
Wagner as she herself was to believe in a few years’ time, for we use
the weapons won in battle after all finally to liberate ourselves from
him whom we have momentarily vanquished, he was nevertheless seeking,
people beginning to have had their fill of works that were too complete,
in which everything is expressed, to satisfy a contrary need. This
reaction had been bolstered momentarily, of course, by theories, similar
to those which, in politics, come to the support of laws against the
Congregations, or wars in the East (teaching against nature, Yellow
Peril, etc.).⁹ An age of haste called, it was said, for rapidity in art,
absolutely as they might have said that a future war could not last more
than a fortnight, or that the out-of-the-way spots beloved of the
stage-coaches would be forsaken by the railways but restored to honour
by the motor-car. It was recommended not to tire the listener’s
attention, as though we did not have at our command different degrees of
attention, the highest of which it is in fact up to the artist to
awaken. For those who yawn with fatigue after ten lines of some
second-rate article have been making the journey to Bayreuth year after
year to hear the _Tetralogy_.¹⁰ The day was coming, moreover, when, for
a time, Debussy would be declared to be as fragile as Massenet¹¹ and the
joltings of _Mélisande_ demoted to the rank of those of _Manon_. For
theories and schools, like microbes and globules, devour one another
and, by their struggles, ensure life’s continuance. But that time had
not yet come.

As on the Bourse, when an upward movement occurs and a whole section of
the market profits by it, a certain number of disdained authors had
benefited from the reaction, either because they had not deserved such
disdain, or simply – which enabled one to break new ground by extolling
them – because they had brought it on themselves. And people even went
looking, in an isolated past, for a few independent talents whose
reputation the current movement should not, seemingly, have affected,
but whose name one of the new masters was thought to have cited
favourably. Often it was because a master, whoever he might be, and
however exclusive his school may be, is original in his judgments and
does justice to talent wherever it is to be found, and to less than
talent even, to a pleasing inspiration he has enjoyed in the past,
linked to some cherished moment of his adolescence. At other times,
because certain artists of another epoch have, in a single piece,
achieved something that resembles what the master has gradually realized
he has been seeking to do himself. He then sees this elder as something
like a precursor; he likes in him, in another form, an effort that is
momentarily, and in part, fraternal. There are bits of Turner in the
work of Poussin, a phrase of Flaubert’s in Montesquieu. But sometimes,
too, the rumour of a master’s predilection had resulted from an error,
born who knows where and hawked about among his school. But the name
cited then benefited from the imprint under whose protection it had come
just in time, for if there is a certain freedom, genuine taste, in the
choice of the master, schools for their part take their lead only from
the theory. Thus it was that, following its customary course, which
advances by digressions, veering off one time in this direction and the
next in the contrary direction, the spirit of the age had brought back
into the spotlight a certain number of works, to which the need for
justice, or for renewal, or the taste of Debussy, or some caprice of
his, or some remark he had not perhaps made, had added those of Chopin.
Extolled by judges in whom people had every confidence, and benefiting
from the admiration aroused by _Pelléas_, they had rediscovered a new
_éclat_, and even those who had not heard them again were so anxious to
like them that they did so despite themselves, though with an illusion
of freedom. But Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin remained for part of the year
in the provinces. Even in Paris, as an invalid, she lived largely in her
bedroom. It is true that this handicap managed to draw attention to
itself mainly in the choice of expressions that Mme de Cambremer thought
were fashionable, which would have been better suited to the written
language, a nuance she had not discerned, for she derived them more from
reading than from conversation. This last is necessary for an accurate
knowledge less of people’s opinions than of the new expressions.
However, the rejuvenation of the _Nocturnes_ had yet to be announced by
the critics. News of it had been passed on only in casual conversation
by ‘the young’. It remained unknown to Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin. I
took pleasure in informing her, though by addressing her mother-in-law
for this purpose, as when, in billiards, you play off the cushion in
order to strike a ball, that, very far from being old-fashioned, Chopin
was Debussy’s favourite musician. ‘Well I never, how amusing,’ the
daughter-in-law said with a smile, as though this were merely a paradox
tossed off by the author of _Pelléas_. Nevertheless, it was quite
certain now that she would only ever listen to Chopin with respect or
even with pleasure. And so my words, which had just sounded the hour of
her deliverance for the dowager, brought an expression of gratitude to
me, and above all of joy, to her face. Her eyes shone like those of
Latude in the play entitled _Latude or 35 years of Captivity_;¹² and her
breast inhaled the sea-air with that dilatation that Beethoven has
emphasized so well in _Fidelio_, when his prisoners finally breathe in
‘the air that gives life’.¹³ I thought she was going to put her
moustachioed lips to my cheek. ‘What, you like Chopin? He likes Chopin,
he likes Chopin,’ she exclaimed with an impassioned nasal twang, as she
might have said: ‘What, you know Mme de Francquetot, too?’, with the
difference that my connection with Mme de Francquetot would have been a
matter of profound indifference to her, whereas my knowledge of Chopin
threw her into a sort of artistic delirium. Salivary hypersecretion was
no longer enough. Without even having tried to understand Debussy’s role
in the reinvention of Chopin, she simply felt that my verdict was
favourable. She was seized by musical enthusiasm. ‘Elodie! Elodie! He
likes Chopin.’ Her bosom swelled and she beat the air with her arms.
‘Ah, I’d sensed indeed you were a musician, she exclaimed. I can
understand, aaartist that you are, that you should like it. It’s so
beautiful!’ And her voice was as flinty as if, in order to express her
ardour for Chopin, she had, in imitation of Demosthenes, filled her
mouth with all the pebbles from the beach. Finally there came the
reflux, reaching as far as her veil, which she had not had time to
remove to safety and was drenched, and finally the Marquise took her
embroidered handkerchief to the dribble of foam with which the memory of
Chopin had just soaked her moustaches.

‘Heavens, Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin said to me, I think my
mother-in-law’s overstaying her welcome rather, she’s forgetting we’ve
got my uncle de Ch’nouville coming to dinner. And besides, Cancan
doesn’t like to wait.’ Cancan remained beyond me, I thought perhaps it
referred to a dog. But where the de Ch’nouville cousins were concerned,
it was as follows. With age, the pleasure the young Marquise had taken
in pronouncing their name in this fashion had died down. And yet, in the
old days, it had been in order to enjoy it that she resolved on her
marriage. In other social groups, when the name of de Chenouville came
up (every time at least that the _particule_¹⁴ was preceded by a noun
ending in a vowel, for in the contrary case one was indeed obliged to
lay stress on the _de_, the tongue refusing to pronounce Madam’
d’Ch’nonceaux), it was customary for the mute _e_ of the _particule_ to
be sacrificed. They said: ‘Monsieur d’Chenouville’. Among the
Cambremers, the tradition was the reverse, but equally imperious. In
every case it was the mute _e_ in Chenouville that was suppressed.
Whether the name were preceded by ‘_mon cousin_’ or ‘_ma cousine_’, it
was always de ‘Ch’nouville’ and never ‘Chenouville’. (Where the father
of these Chenouvilles was concerned, they said ‘_notre oncle_’, for they
were not upper-crust enough at Féterne to pronounce it ‘_notre onk_’, as
the Guermantes would have done, whose required jargon, suppressing
consonants and nationalizing foreign names, was as hard to understand as
old French or the modern patois.) Every person entering the Cambremer
family at once received a warning, in this matter of the Ch’nouvilles,
of which Mlle Legrandin had had no need. Visiting one day, and hearing a
girl say ‘_ma tante d’Uzai’, ‘mon onk de Rouan’_, she had not recognized
straight away the illustrious names she was in the habit of pronouncing
‘Uzès’ or ‘Rohan’; hers had been the surprise, the embarrassment and the
shame of someone who finds a newly invented utensil before them on the
dinner table of whose use they are ignorant and with which they do not
dare to start eating. But the night following and the next day, she had
repeated, enraptured: ‘_ma tante d’Uzai_’, with that suppression of the
final _s_, a suppression that had astounded her the day before but which
she now found it so vulgar not to be aware of, one of her women friends
having referred to a bust of the Duchesse d’Uzès, Mlle Legrandin had
answered her ill-humouredly and in a haughty tone: ‘You might at least
pronounce it correctly: “_Mame d’Uzai_”.’ From that moment on, she had
realized that, by virtue of the transmutation of solid matter into ever
more subtle elements, the considerable and very honourably acquired
fortune that she owed to her father, the thorough education that she had
received, her assiduity at the Sorbonne, at Caro’s lectures along with
those of Brunetière’,¹⁵ and at the Lamoureux concerts,¹⁶ all this was to
be volatilized, to find its final sublimation in the pleasure of one day
saying: ‘_ma tante d’Uzai_’. This did not exclude from her mind that she
would continue to associate, at least in the early days following her
marriage, not with certain woman friends whom she liked but was resigned
to giving up, but with certain others whom she did not like but to whom
she wished to be able to say (since this was her reason for marrying):
‘I shall introduce you to my aunt d’Uzai’, or when she saw that this
alliance was too difficult: ‘I shall introduce you to my aunt de
Ch’nouville’ or ‘I’ll have you to dinner with the Uzais.’ Her marriage
to M. de Cambremer had provided Mme de Cambremer with the opportunity of
saying the first of these sentences but not the second, the society in
which her parents-in-law moved not being that which she had imagined and
of which she continued to dream. And so, after having said to me about
Saint-Loup (adopting for the purpose an expression of Robert’s own, for
if, in order to talk to her, I had spoken like Legrandin, she, by an
opposite suggestion, had answered me in Robert’s dialect, borrowed
unbeknownst to her from Rachel), bringing her thumb and forefinger
together and half closing her eyes, as though she were gazing at
something infinitely delicate that she had succeeding in capturing: ‘He
has a pretty quality of mind’; so wholehearted was she in her praise of
him that you might have thought she was in love with him (it was
claimed, as it happens, that in the old days, when he was at Doncières,
Robert had been her lover), but in reality merely so that I might repeat
it to him, and to lead up to: ‘You’re very friendly with the Duchesse de
Guermantes. I’m ailing, I hardly get out, and I know she remains
confined within a circle of select friends, which I fully approve of, so
I know her only slightly, but I do know she’s an absolutely superior
woman.’ Knowing that Mme de Cambremer scarcely knew her, and to make
myself as small as she was, I slid over this topic and said, in answer
to the Marquise, that I had above all known her brother, M. Legrandin.
At this name, she adopted the same evasive expression as I had worn in
the case of Mme de Guermantes, but combining with it a look of
displeasure, for she thought I had said this in order to humble, not
myself, but her. Was she eaten away with despair at having been born
Legrandin? That at least was what her husband’s sisters and
sisters-in-law claimed, provincial noblewomen who knew nobody and
nothing, and were jealous of Mme de Cambremer’s intelligence, her
education, her wealth, and the physical attractions she had possessed
before she fell ill. ‘She thinks of nothing else, it’s that that’s
killing her,’ these spiteful women would say the moment they were
talking about Mme de Cambremer to anyone at all, but preferably to a
commoner, either, if he was conceited and stupid, so as to enhance the
value, by this assertion of the shame attaching to the commoner’s
condition, of the affability they were showing him, or else, if he was
shy and discerning, and had applied the remark to himself, so as to have
the pleasure, even as they received him courteously, of indirectly
behaving insolently towards him. But if these ladies believed they spoke
true where their sister-in-law was concerned, they were mistaken. The
latter suffered all the less from having been born Legrandin for having
lost all memory of the fact. She was put out that I should have reminded
her of it and fell silent as if she had not understood, not regarding it
as necessary to supply any details, nor even to confirm mine.

‘Our relations are not the main reason for cutting short our visit,’ the
dowager Mme de Cambremer said to me, who was probably more blasé than
her daughter-in-law where the pleasure to be had from saying
‘Ch’nouville’ was concerned. ‘But so as not to tire you out with too
many people, Monsieur, she said, indicating the lawyer, did not dare
bring his wife and son all the way here. They’re walking on the beach
while they wait for us and must be starting to get bored.’ I had them
carefully pointed out to me and hurried off to find them. The wife had a
round face like certain flowers of the Ranunculus family, and quite a
large plant-like mark at the corner of her eye. And since the
generations of men preserve their features like a family of plants, just
as on the faded face of the mother, so the same mark, which might have
helped to classify a variety, swelled beneath the eye of the son. The
lawyer was touched by my attentiveness towards his wife and son. He
showed interest in the subject of my stay in Balbec. ‘You must feel a
bit out of place, for they’re foreigners here for the most part.’ And he
looked at me as he spoke, for, not liking foreigners, though many were
his clients, he wanted to be sure that I was not hostile to his
xenophobia, in which case he would have beaten a retreat, by saying: ‘Of
course Mme X may be a charming woman. It’s a question of principle.’
Since at that time I had no opinion concerning foreigners, I evinced no
disapproval, and he felt himself on safe ground. He went so far as to
ask me to call on him one day in Paris, to see his collection of Le
Sidaners, and to bring the Cambremers along, with whom he obviously
thought I was intimate. ‘I shall invite you with Le Sidaner, he said,
convinced I would be living only in anticipation of that blessed day.
You’ll see what a delightful man he is. And his pictures will enchant
you. Of course, I can’t compete with the big collectors, but I believe
it’s I who own the greatest number of his favourite canvases. It’ll
interest you all the more, coming from Balbec, because they’re
seascapes, in the majority at least.’ The wife and son, of a vegetable
disposition, listened composedly. You sensed that their house in Paris
was a sort of temple to Le Sidaner. These sorts of temples are not
without their uses. When the god has doubts about himself, he can easily
stop up the fissures in his own opinion with the irrefutable testimony
of individuals who have devoted their lives to his work.

At a signal from her daughter-in-law, Mme de Cambremer made to stand up
and said to me: ‘Since you don’t want to install yourself at Féterne,
won’t you at least come and have lunch, one weekday, tomorrow for
example?’ And in her benevolence, in order to decide me, she added:
‘You’ll find the Comte de Crisenoy there,’ whom I certainly had not
lost, for the good reason that I did not know him. She was starting to
hold out still other shining temptations to me, but stopped short. The
First President, who, on returning, had learned that she was in the
hotel, had been searching everywhere for her on the sly, had then waited
for her and, pretending to be meeting her by chance, came up to present
his respects. I realized that Mme de Cambremer was not keen to extend to
him the luncheon invitation she had just addressed to me. He, however,
had known her for much longer than I had, having for years past been one
of those regulars at the Féterne matinées whom I had so much envied
during my first stay in Balbec. But seniority cannot do everything among
society people. They reserve their lunches more readily for those new
connections who can still prick their curiosity, especially when their
arrival is preceded by a cordial and prestigious recommendation such as
that of Saint-Loup. Mme de Cambremer calculated that the First President
had not heard what she said to me, but in order to still the remorse
that she felt, she addressed him in the most friendly manner. In the
sunlight in which, on the horizon, the golden shoreline of Rivebelle,
normally invisible, was bathed, we could make out, barely separate from
the luminous azure, emerging from the water, pink, silvery,
imperceptible, the little bells of the angelus ringing out in the
vicinity of Féterne. ‘Again, it’s rather like _Pelléas_, I remarked to
Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin. You know the scene I mean. – I think I do,
yes.’ But ‘I’ve no idea’ was what her voice and her face proclaimed,
uninformed by any memory, and her unsupported smile off into the air.
The dowager could not get over the fact that the bells had carried all
this way and stood up, thinking of the time: ‘In fact, I said, from
Balbec, you can’t normally see that shoreline, nor hear it either. The
weather must have changed and made the horizon twice as wide. Unless
they’ve come to fetch you, for I can see they’re making you leave; for
you they are the dinner-bell.’ The First President, none too responsive
to the bells, was gazing furtively at the esplanade, which he was
distressed to see so depopulated this evening. ‘You’re a true poet, Mme
de Cambremer said to me. I can tell how fine-strung you are, how
artistic; come and I will play you some Chopin,’ she added, raising her
arms with an ecstatic air and pronouncing the words in a hoarse voice
that seemed as if it were shifting pebbles. Then came the deglutition of
the saliva, and the old lady instinctively wiped her so-called
‘American’ toothbrush moustache with her handkerchief. The First
President rendered me a very great service in spite of himself by
seizing the Marquise by the arm in order to conduct her to her carriage,
a certain admixture of vulgarity, boldness and a liking for ostentation
having dictated a course of behaviour that others would hesitate before
adopting, but which is found far from displeasing in society. It had, in
any case, been much more of a habit with him these many years past than
with me. I may have blessed him but I did not dare to imitate him, and
walked beside Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin, who wanted to see the book I
had in my hand. The name of Mme de Sévigné caused her to screw up her
face; and employing a word she had read in certain newspapers, but
which, when spoken and put into the feminine, and applied to a writer of
the seventeenth century, created a bizarre effect, she asked me: ‘Do you
find her genuinely _talentueuse_?’¹⁷ The Marquise gave the footman the
address of a pâtis-serie she needed to go to before taking again to the
road, pink from the dust of evening, in which the stepped rumps of the
cliffs had turned blue. She asked her old coachman whether one of her
horses that felt the cold had been warm enough, whether another’s shoe
might not be hurting. ‘I shall write to you about what we have to
arrange, she said to me in a low voice. I saw you were talking
literature with my daughter-in-law, she’s adorable,’ she added, although
she did not believe this but had got into the habit – maintained out of
goodness of heart – of saying so, so that her son should not seem to
have married for money. ‘Besides, she added, in a last enthusiastic
mumble, she’s so aaartissstic!’ Then she climbed into her carriage,
swaying her head and raising the handle of her sunshade, and went off
again through the streets of Balbec, weighed down by the vestments of
her ministry, like an old bishop on his confirmation rounds.

‘She has invited you to lunch,’ the First President said to me sternly
once the carriage had moved off and I came back with the girls. ‘We’re
not on good terms. She thinks I neglect her. But there, I’m easy enough
to get on with. Should anyone have need of me, I’m always there to
answer “present”. But they tried to throw the grappling-irons over me.
Ah, well, that!’ he added, with a canny expression and raising his
finger like someone splitting hairs: ‘That I don’t allow. That’s an
attack on my liberty when on holiday. I was obliged to say: “Stop
there!” You seem to be very well in with her. When you get to be my age,
you’ll find that society is nothing really, and you’ll regret having
attached so much importance to these trifles. Right, I’m going to take a
turn before dinner. _Adieu les enfants_,’ he cried to the world at
large, as if he were already fifty metres away.

Once I had said goodbye to Rosemonde and Gisèle, they saw with
astonishment that Albertine had stopped, without following them.
‘Albertine, what are you doing, you know the time? – You go home, she
replied authoritatively, I have to talk with him,’ she added, indicating
me with a submissive expression. Rosemonde and Gisèle looked at me,
imbued so far as I was concerned with a new respect. I enjoyed feeling
that, for the moment at least, and in the eyes even of Rosemonde and
Gisèle, I counted for more with Albertine than the time of her return
home, or than her friends, and might even share solemn secrets with her
into which it was impossible that they be admitted. ‘Shan’t we be seeing
you this evening? – I don’t know, that’ll depend on him here. – Till
tomorrow anyway. – Let’s go up to my room,’ I said to her, once her
friends had gone off. We took the lift; she held her tongue in front of
the ‘lift’. The habit of being obliged to rely on personal observation
and on deduction in order to know the petty concerns of their masters,
those strange people who talk among themselves but do not speak to them,
develops a greater power of divination among ‘employees’ (as the ‘lift’
called the servants) than among the ‘employers’. Our organs atrophy or
become stronger or more subtle according as the need for them increases
or diminishes. Since the existence of railways, the necessity of not
missing the train has taught us to reckon the minutes, whereas among the
ancient Romans, whose astronomy was not only more perfunctory but whose
lives were less hurried, the notion, not of minutes but even of fixed
hours of the day, scarcely existed. So the ‘lift’ had understood, and
was counting on retailing to his fellows, that we were preoccupied,
Albertine and I. But he talked to us without stopping because he was
without tact. I could see depicted on his face, however, substituted for
the usual impression of friendship and delight at taking me up in his
lift, a look of extraordinary dejection and anxiety. Since I was
ignorant of its cause, in an attempt to distract him, and although more
preoccupied with Albertine, I told him that the name of the lady who had
just left was the Marquise de Cambremer and not de Camembert. On the
floor that we were just then passing, I caught sight of, carrying a
bolster, a frightful-looking chambermaid who curtseyed to me
respectfully, hoping for a tip on my departure. I would like to have
known whether it was the one I had so much desired on the evening of my
first arrival in Balbec, but I was never able to be certain. The ‘lift’
swore to me, with the sincerity of most false witnesses, though without
abandoning his despairing expression, that it was certainly under the
name of Camembert that the Marquise had asked him to announce her. And
truth to tell it was quite natural that he should have heard a name he
knew already. Besides, having, where the nobility and the nature of the
names out of which titles are made are concerned, the very vague notions
which are those of many people who are not liftboys, the name of
Camembert had struck him as all the more probable in that, this cheese
being universally known, there was no call to be surprised that a
Marquisate of such glorious renown should have been derived from it,
unless it were that of the Marquisate which had lent its celebrity to
the cheese. All the same, as he could see that I did not wish to appear
to have made a mistake, for he knew that the masters like to see their
most futile whims being obeyed and their most blatant falsehoods
accepted, he promised me, like a good servant, to say Cambremer from
then on. It is true that no shopkeeper in the town, nor countryman from
roundabout, where the name and the persons of the Cambremers were
thoroughly familiar, would ever have been able to make the ‘lift’s’
mistake. But the staff at the Grand-Hôtel de Balbec were not in any
sense locals. They had come in a straight line, with all their
equipment, from Biarritz, Nice and Monte-Carlo, one part having been
directed to Deauville, another to Dinard and the third been kept for
Balbec.

But the ‘lift’s’ sorrowful anxiety only grew. For him thus to have
neglected to evince his devotion to me by his customary smiles, some
misfortune had to have befallen him. Perhaps he had been ‘moved’. I
promised myself in that event to try to get him kept on, the manager
having promised he would ratify whatever I might decide where his staff
were concerned. ‘You can always do what you want, I rectify it in
advance.’ Suddenly, just after leaving the lift, I fathomed the ‘lift’s’
distress, his downcast expression. Because of the presence of Albertine
I had not given him the hundred sous I was in the habit of handing him
as we ascended. And instead of realizing that I did not want to make a
show of tipping in front of a third party, the imbecile had begun to
tremble, assuming that it was over once and for all, that never again
would I give him anything. He had been imagining that I had ‘come a
cropper’ (as the Duc de Guermantes would have said), and that
supposition had filled him, not with any compassion for me but with a
terrible, selfish disappointment. I told myself I was less unreasonable
than my mother had thought one day when I had not dared not to give the
exaggerated but feverishly anticipated sum that I had given the day
before. But also, the significance I had hitherto been lending, without
the slightest doubt, to the customary expression of delight, which I had
not hesitated to see as a sign of attachment, appeared less certain in
meaning. Seeing the liftboy ready, in his despair, to throw himself down
five storeys, I wondered whether, had our respective positions in
society been reversed, as the result of a revolution for example,
instead of operating the lift for me so politely, the ‘lift’, now a
bourgeois, might not have thrown me from it, and whether there is not,
among certain classes of the people, more duplicity than in society,
where, no doubt, the disobliging remarks are reserved for when we are
absent, but where the attitude towards us would not be insulting were we
to fall on hard times.

It cannot be said, however, that at the Balbec hotel the ‘lift’ was the
most self-interested. So far as that went, the staff could be divided
into two categories: on the one hand, those who made a distinction
between the guests, being more responsive to the reasonable gratuity
from an old nobleman (in a position of course to get him excused his
twenty-eight days by putting in a word with General de Beautreillis)
than to the reckless largesse of some foreign money-bags, who thereby
betrayed a lack of breeding that was referred to as generosity only to
his face. And on the other hand, those for whom nobility, intelligence,
celebrity, position, manners, were non-existent, being masked by a
figure. For these there was only one hierarchy, the money that you have,
or rather that you give. Aimé himself, although he aspired, on account
of the large number of hotels in which he had served, to a wide
knowledge of the world, perhaps belonged to this category. At most, he
would give a social twist, as knowing the families, to this kind of
appreciation, by saying of the Princess of Luxembourg for example: ‘Is
there plenty of money there?’ (the question-mark being in order to gain
information, or to check one last time on information already acquired,
before procuring for a guest a ‘chef’ for Paris, or guaranteeing him a
table on the left, as you go in, with a view of the sea, at Balbec).
Despite which, without being devoid of self-interest, he would not have
exhibited it with the same foolish despair as the ‘lift’. On the other
hand, the latter’s artlessness perhaps simplified matters. The
convenience of a grand hotel, or an establishment such as Rachel’s once
was, is that, without intermediaries, the sight of a hundred-franc note,
and even more of a thousand-franc note, even when being given on this
occasion to someone else, causes the hitherto frozen face of an employee
or of a woman to smile and show willing. In politics on the other hand,
or the relationship of a lover and a mistress, too many things are
interposed between the money and the docility. So many things that even
those in whom money finally kindles a smile are often incapable of
following the inner process that links them, and believe themselves to
be, indeed are, more delicate. Besides, this clarifies polite
conversation of all that ‘I know what remains for me to do, tomorrow
they’ll find me in the morgue.’ Thus one meets in polite society with
few novelists, or poets or all those sublime creatures who talk about
the very things that should not be said.

As soon as we were alone and had started down the corridor, Albertine
said to me: ‘What have you got against me?’ Had my severity towards her
not been more painful to myself? Was it only an unconscious stratagem on
my part, with a view to inducing in my loved one, vis-à-vis myself, that
attitude of fear and entreaty which would enable me to question her and
learn perhaps which of the two hypotheses I had long since formed about
her was the right one? The fact is that when I heard her question, I
felt suddenly happy, like someone close to attaining a long-desired
objective. Before answering her, I led her all the way to my door. As it
opened, the latter caused the pink light that was filling the room to
flow back and turned the white muslin of the curtains hanging against
the evening into saffron lampas. I went as far as the window; the gulls
had settled again on the waves; but now they were pink. I remarked on
this to Albertine: ‘Don’t change the subject, she said, be open like
me.’ I lied. I declared that she would have to listen to a preliminary
confession, of a great passion that I had been feeling for some time
past for Andrée, and I made it to her with a simplicity and candour
worthy of the stage, but which we hardly ever have in life save in the
case of a love that we do not feel. Repeating the falsehood I had used
with Gilberte before my first stay in Balbec, but varying it, I went so
far, the better to make her believe me when I now told her that I did
not love her, as to let slip that in the old days I had been on the
point of falling in love with her, but that too much time had elapsed,
that she was no more to me than a good companion, and that, even had I
wanted, it would no longer have been possible for me again to have more
ardent feelings towards her. Moreover, by thus dwelling in Albertine’s
presence on the protestations of my indifference towards her, all that I
was doing – because of a particular circumstance and with a particular
end in view – was to make more apparent, to mark with greater force, the
binary rhythm that love assumes in all who are too unsure of themselves
to believe that a woman can ever love them, and also that they can truly
love her. They have sufficient self-knowledge to know that, with the
most dissimilar women, they have felt the same hopes and the same
anxieties, have invented the same fictions and uttered the same words,
to have thus been made aware that their sentiments and their actions
bear no close or necessary relation to the beloved, but pass to one side
of her, splashing her, circumventing her like the tide that dashes
itself along the rocks, and the sense of their own instability even
increases their mistrust as to whether this woman, by whom they would
like so much to be loved, loves them. Why would chance so order it, when
she is nothing more than a simple accident set down before the
outpouring of our desires, that we should be the object of those that
she feels? And so, even while needing to pour out all these feelings
towards her, so very different from the merely human feelings inspired
in us by our neighbours, the very special feelings which are those of
love, having taken a step forward, confessing to the one we love our
affection for her and our hopes, instantly fearful of displeasing her,
embarrassed, too, at sensing that the language we have used was not
created expressly for her, that it has served, will serve us, for
others, that if she does not love us she cannot understand us, that we
have spoken with the lack of good taste, the immodesty of the pedant
addressing subtle phrases not designed for them to dunces, this fear,
this shame, lead to a counter-rhythm, a reflux, a need, be it by first
of all drawing back, quickly to retract our previously confessed
sympathy, to resume the offensive and recover our esteem, our dominance;
this double rhythm is to be perceived in the various stages of a single
love affair, in all the corresponding periods of similar love affairs,
and in all those individuals who are better at analysing than at valuing
themselves. If, however, it was accentuated rather more forcefully than
is customary in the speech I was in the midst of making to Albertine,
this was simply to enable me to move more rapidly and energetically into
the contrary rhythm, punctuated by my affection.

As though Albertine must be having difficulty believing what I had told
her of the impossibility of my loving her again, because of the too long
interval, I backed up what I had called a quirk of my character with
examples taken from people with whom I had, either by their fault or my
own, allowed the moment of loving them to pass, without being able,
however much I might desire it, to rediscover it afterwards. I thus
appeared to be both apologizing to her, as if for an impoliteness, for
this inability to start loving her again, and to be trying to make her
understand the psychological reasons as if they had been peculiar to
myself. But in explaining myself in this fashion, in elaborating on the
case of Gilberte, in respect of whom what had become so untrue when
applied to Albertine had been strictly true, I was simply making my
assertions as plausible as I had pretended to believe that they were
implausible. Sensing that Albertine had appreciated what she believed
was my ‘frank talking’, and had recognized in my deductions the clarity
of the self-evident, I apologized for the former, telling her that I
knew quite well that one always gave offence by speaking the truth and
that she must anyway have found it incomprehensible. She thanked me on
the contrary for my sincerity and added into the bargain that she
understood perfectly a state of mind so common and so natural.

So as to appear wholly sincere and not to be exaggerating, I assured
Albertine in passing, as if making a point of being polite, that this
confession of an imaginary feeling for Andrée, and of indifference
towards herself, was not to be taken too literally, and I was finally
able, without fearing that Albertine might suspect love in it, to speak
to her with a gentleness that I had for so long denied myself and which
I found delectable. I was almost caressing my confidante; as I spoke to
her of her friend whom I loved, tears came into my eyes. But coming to
the point, I finally told her that she knew what love was like, its
susceptibilities and its sufferings, and that perhaps, as a friend
already of long standing, she would have her heart set on putting an end
to the great unhappiness she had been causing me, not directly, since it
was not her that I loved, if I might venture to repeat that without
offending her, but indirectly, by injuring me in my love for Andrée. I
broke off to look and to indicate to Albertine a large solitary,
hurrying bird which, far ahead of us, was lashing the air with the
regular beat of its wings and, travelling at great speed above the
beach, stained here and there by reflections like small pieces of torn
red paper, covered its entire length, without slackening its speed,
without its attention being diverted, without deviating from its course,
like an emissary carrying far off some urgent, critical message. ‘It at
least goes straight to the mark! said Albertine with a reproachful look.
– You say that because you don’t know what I’d have liked to say to you.
But it’s so difficult that I’d rather give up; I’m certain I’d make you
angry; and then all it would lead to is this: I’d be in no way happier
with the one I’ve given my heart to but I’d have lost a good companion.
– But since I swear I shan’t be angry.’ She looked so sweet, so sadly
docile, to be waiting for her happiness to come from me, that I had
difficulty restraining myself and not kissing – kissing with the kind of
pleasure almost that I would have got from kissing my mother – that new
face, which no longer had the alert, blushing appearance of a perverse
and mischievous kitten, with its little pink, upturned nose, but seemed,
in the fullness of its overwhelming sadness, to have melted, in broad,
flattened, descending rivulets, into kindness. Leaving my love out of
account, as though it were a chronic foolishness unconnected with her,
and putting myself in her place, I felt pity faced by this good girl,
accustomed to being treated fairly and kindly, yet against whom the good
companion she may have thought I was for her had been conducting for
weeks past a persecution that had finally reached a climax. It was
because I had taken up a simply human vantage-point, external to the two
of us, from where my jealous love had vanished, that I felt this
profound pity for Albertine, which would have been less so if I had not
loved her. Moreover, in this rhythmic oscillation, which goes from the
declaration to the quarrel (the surest, most dangerously effective means
of forming, by contrary and successive movements, a knot that will not
come untied but which attaches us firmly to a person), and at the heart
of the movement of withdrawal which constitutes one of the two elements
in this rhythm, what use is it still to distinguish these refluxes of
human pity which, opposed to love yet perhaps having unconsciously the
same cause, lead in any case to the same effects? When afterwards we
recall the sum-total of all that we have done for a woman, we are often
made aware that the actions inspired by the desire to demonstrate that
we love her, to make ourselves loved, to win favours, occupy little more
space than those attributable to the human need to set right the wrongs
we have done to the one we love, out of a simple moral duty, as though
we did not love them. ‘So, then, what have I managed to do?’ Albertine
asked me. There was a knock; it was the ‘lift’; Albertine’s aunt, who
had been passing the hotel in her carriage, had stopped on the off
chance to see whether she might not be there and to take her back.
Albertine sent answer that she could not come down, that they should eat
without waiting for her, that she did not know what time she would be
home. ‘But your aunt will be angry? – Don’t you believe it! She’ll
understand perfectly.’ And so – at this moment at least, such as would
not perhaps recur – a conversation with me was, as Albertine saw it, the
circumstances being what they were, a matter so self-evidently important
that it must come before everything else, to which, referring herself no
doubt instinctively to a familial jurisprudence, and enumerating the
situations in which, when M. Bontemps’s career had been at stake, a
journey was not a consideration, my loved one was in no doubt that her
aunt would think it perfectly natural to find the dinner hour being
sacrificed. Having slid this remote hour that she spent without me, at
her family’s, all the way to me, Albertine gave it to me; I could use it
as I saw fit. In the end I ventured to tell her what had been reported
to me as to her mode of life, and that, despite the profound disgust
aroused in me by women afflicted with that same vice, I had not felt any
concern until they named her accomplice to me, and that she could well
understand, loving Andrée to the extent that I did, the grief that I had
experienced. It would have been cleverer perhaps to say that other
women, too, had been named, but ones who meant nothing to me. But
Cottard’s abrupt and terrible revelation had entered into me and
lacerated me just as it was, in its entirety, with nothing to be added.
And just as, before, I could never on my own have imagined that
Albertine loved Andrée, or might at least play caressing games with her,
had Cottard not drawn my attention to their attitude as they waltzed, so
I had been unable to move on from that idea to the, for me, so very
different one that Albertine might have relationships with women other
than Andrée which not even affection could excuse. Even before swearing
to me that it was not true, Albertine, like anyone who has just been
told they have been talked about in this way, displayed anger,
unhappiness and, where the unknown slanderer was concerned, a raging
curiosity to learn who it was and a desire to come face to face with
them so as to be able to confound them. But she assured me that at least
she did not hold it against me. ‘If it’d been true, I’d have confessed
it. But Andrée and I are both as horrified as each other by that sort of
thing. We haven’t reached the age we are without seeing women with short
hair, who have mannish ways and are of the kind you say, and nothing
revolts us as much.’ Albertine merely gave me her word, a peremptory
word and unsupported by any proof. But that was the very thing best able
to set my mind at rest, jealousy belonging to that family of unhealthy
doubts far more easily removed by the vigour of an affirmation than by
its plausibility. A peculiarity of love, moreover, is that it makes us
at once more mistrustful and more credulous, makes us quicker to suspect
the one we love than we would have another woman, and to be readier to
lend credence to her denials. We must be in love to feel concern that
there are not only honest women, or in other words to be made aware of
it, and in love, also, if we are to hope, that is to say to be sure,
that there are some. It is human to seek out sorrow and at once to be
delivered from it. The propositions capable of succeeding in this easily
strike us as true, we do not quibble for long over a sedative that
works. And besides, however multiple the person that we love may be,
they may in any case present two essential personalities to us,
according to whether they appear as ours or as turning their desires
elsewhere than towards us. The first of these personalities possesses
the peculiar power which prevents us from believing in the reality of
the second, the specific secret for allaying the suffering that the
latter has caused. The loved one is by turns the sickness and the remedy
that suspends and aggravates the sickness. No doubt I had long been
prepared, by virtue of the sway exercised over my imagination and my
ability to be moved by the example of Swann, to believe that what I
feared was true instead of what I would have wished for. Thus the
comfort brought by Albertine’s affirmations was all but compromised for
a moment because I recalled the story of Odette. But I told myself that
if it was right to make allowances for the worst, not only when, in
order to understand Swann’s sufferings, I had tried to put myself in his
place, but now that it involved myself, by seeking the truth as though
it involved someone else, it must not, however, out of cruelty towards
myself, a soldier choosing the post, not where he may be of the greatest
use but where he is the most exposed, eventuate in the error of holding
one supposition to be truer than the others solely because it was the
most painful. Was there not an abyss between Albertine, a girl from
quite a good bourgeois family, and Odette, a cocotte sold by her mother
from an early age? The word of the one was not to be set alongside that
of the other. Moreover, Albertine had none of the same interest in lying
to me as Odette had to Swann. Besides, Odette had confessed to the
latter what Albertine had just denied. I should therefore have committed
an error of reasoning as serious – though opposite – as that which would
have inclined me towards a hypothesis on the grounds that it would have
caused me less suffering than the others, by not taking into account
these real differences between their situations and reconstructing the
actual life of my loved one solely in terms of what I had learned of
Odette’s. I had before me a new Albertine, already glimpsed on several
occasions, it was true, towards the end of my first stay in Balbec,
open, good-natured, an Albertine who, out of affection for me, had just
forgiven me my suspicions and attempted to dispel them. She made me sit
down beside her on my bed. I thanked her for what she had said, I
assured her that our reconciliation was complete and that never again
would I be hard on her. I told Albertine that she should, all the same,
go back home for dinner. She asked me whether I was not comfortable as
we were. And drawing down my head for a caress she had never as yet
given me, and which I owed perhaps to the ending of our quarrel, she
passed her tongue lightly over my lips, and tried to part them. To start
with, I kept them tightly shut. ‘You’re being such a naughty boy!’ she
said.

I should have left that evening without ever seeing her again. I had a
presentiment from then on that in a love that is not shared – or in
other words, in love, for there are people for whom there is no shared
love – all we can taste of happiness is that simulacrum which had been
granted me at one of those unique moments when a woman’s kindness, or
her caprice, or chance, applies to our desires, in a perfect
coincidence, the same words and the same actions as if we had truly been
loved. The wise thing would have been to contemplate with curiosity, to
possess with delight, this small particle of happiness, lacking which I
would have died without having suspected what it can be like for hearts
less difficult or more favoured; to suppose that it formed part of a
vast and enduring happiness that had appeared to me at this point alone;
and, so that the following day might not give the lie to this pretence,
not to try to demand a further favour following that which had been due
only to the artifice of an exceptional moment. I should have left
Balbec, have shut myself away in solitude, have remained there in
harmony with the dying vibrations of the voice I had been able to turn
for a moment into that of love, and of which I would have demanded
nothing more than never to address me further; for fear that by some
fresh utterance, which from now on could only be different, it might
wound by a dissonance the silence of the senses in which, as though
thanks to some pedal, the tonality of happiness might have long survived
within me.

Calmed by my discussion with Albertine, I began to live more in the
company of my mother once again. She liked talking quietly to me about
the days when my grandmother had been younger. Afraid that I might be
reproaching myself for the sadnesses with which I may have darkened the
end of that life, she went gladly back to the years when my early
studies had given my grandmother satisfactions that hitherto had always
been concealed from me. We spoke again of Combray. My mother told me
that there at least I used to read and that in Balbec I should certainly
be doing the same, if I was not working. I replied that in order indeed
to surround myself with memories of Combray and the pretty painted
plates, I would like to reread _The Arabian Nights_. As in the old days
at Combray, when she gave me books for my name day, so as to make it a
surprise, my mother sent secretly for both Galland’s _Arabian Nights_
and Mardrus’s _Arabian Nights_.¹⁸ But having cast an eye over the two
translations, my mother would certainly have wanted me to stick to that
by Galland, while being afraid to influence me on account of the respect
she had for intellectual freedom, of a fear of intervening clumsily in
the life of my mind, and of the feeling that, as a woman, on the one
hand she lacked, as she thought, the necessary literary competence, and
on the other should not be judging a young man’s reading-matter
according to what she found shocking. Lighting upon certain of the
tales, she had been revolted by the immorality of the subject-matter and
the coarseness of the expression. But above all, having conserved as
precious relics, not only the brooch, the _en-tout-cas_,¹⁹ the cloak and
the volume of Mme de Sévigné, but also her mother’s habits of thought
and of language, and searching at every opportunity for the opinion the
latter might have expressed, my mother was in no doubt that my
grandmother would have pronounced sentence on Mardrus’s book. She
recalled that at Combray, when, before setting off on the Méséglise
walk, I had been reading Augustin Thierry,²⁰ my grandmother, happy with
my reading, and with my walks, was indignant all the same to find the
man whose name had remained attached to the hemistich ‘Then Mérovée
reigned’ being referred to as Merowig, and refused to say Carolingians
for the Carlovingians to whom she had remained faithful. In the end I
had told her what my grandmother had thought about the Greek names that
Bloch, following Leconte de Lisle,²¹ had given to the Homeric gods, even
going so far, in the case of the simplest things, to take it as a
religious duty, in which he thought literary talent consisted, to adopt
the Greek spelling. Having to say for example in a letter that the wine
they drank at home was true nectar, he wrote true nektar, with a _k_,
which enabled him to snigger at the name Lamartine.²² Now, if an
_Odyssey_ from which the names of Ulysses and Minerva were missing was
for her no longer the _Odyssey_, what would she have said on seeing the
title of her _Arabian Nights_ deformed on the cover itself, and on no
longer finding, exactly transcribed as she had always been accustomed to
saying them, the immortally familiar names of Scheherezade or
Dinarzarde, or where the charming Caliph and the influential Djinns were
barely recognizable, having been debaptized, if I dare apply that term
in the case of Muslim tales, as, in the one instance, the ‘Kalifat’ and,
in the other, the ‘Gennis’? Meanwhile, my mother handed me the two books
and I told her I would read them on those days when I was too tired to
go out for a walk.

Those days were not very frequent as it happens. We went to have tea as
a ‘gang’ as in the old days, Albertine, her girl-friends and I, on the
cliffs or at the Marie-Antoinette farm. But there were times when
Albertine gave me this great pleasure. She would say: ‘Today I want to
be alone with you for a bit, it would be nicer if just the two of us
met.’ Then she would say she had things to do, that in any case she did
not have to account to anyone, and so that the others, if they went off
for a walk and for tea without us, would not be able to find us, we used
to go off like two lovers all on our own to Bagatelle or La Croix
d’Heulan, while the gang, who would never have thought of looking for us
there and never went there, remained indefinitely, in the hope of seeing
us arrive, at Marie-Antoinette. I remember the warm weather we were then
having, when a drop of sweat would fall vertically, regularly,
intermittently, from the brow of the farmboys working in the sun, like
the drip from a cistern, alternating with the fall of the ripe fruit
coming away from the tree in the neighbouring ‘close’; they have
remained, still today, together with this mystery of a woman concealed,
the most constant element in any love that is offered to me. I will
break all my week’s engagements to get to know a woman I have been told
about but to whom I would not give a moment’s thought, if it is a week
when the weather is of this kind, and if I am to meet her at some
isolated farmhouse. For all my knowing that weather and an assignation
of this sort are not from her, they are the bait, familiar to me though
it is, that I allow myself to take and which is enough to hook me. I
know that in cold weather, in a town, I might have desired this woman,
but without the accompaniment of any romantic feelings, without falling
in love; the love is no less strong once, the circumstances being what
they are, it has enslaved me, it is simply more melancholy, as our
feelings for people become in life the more we perceive the increasingly
small part they are playing and that the new love, which we would wish
to be so enduring, and to be cut short at the same time as our life
itself, will be the last.

There were few people in Balbec as yet, few girls. Sometimes I would see
one or other of them stopped on the beach, without attractions yet whom
many coincidences seemed to certify was the same one as I had been in
despair at not being able to go up to just as she was coming out with
her friends from the riding-school or the gymnastics class. If it was
the same one (and I was careful not to mention her to Albertine), the
girl I had thought intoxicating did not exist. But I was unable to
attain any certainty for the faces of these girls did not occupy a fixed
magnitude on the beach, did not present any permanent form, contracted,
dilated, transformed as they were by my own expectations, by my anxious
longing, or a feeling of well-being that was sufficient unto itself, by
the different outfits that they wore, by the pace they were walking at
or by their immobility. From close to, however, I found two or three of
them adorable. Each time I saw one of these, I longed to take her down
the avenue des Tamaris, or into the dunes, or better still along the
cliffs. But although into desire, as opposed to indifference, there
already enters the boldness that is after all a first step, if a
unilateral one, towards realization, between my desire and the action
that would be my asking to kiss her, there lay the whole indefinite
‘blank’ of hesitation and timidity. So then I would go into the
_pâtissier-limonadier_ and drink seven or eight glasses of port one
after the other. Instantly, in place of that unbridgeable gap between my
desire and the action, the effect of the alcohol drew a line that
conjoined both. No further room for hesitation or fear. I fancied that
the girl would come flying to me. I went up to her, and these words came
from my lips of their own accord: ‘I would like to go for a walk with
you. Wouldn’t you like us to go along the cliffs, you’re not disturbed
by anyone behind the little wood which shields the portable house that’s
currently unlived-in from the wind?’ All life’s difficulties had been
smoothed away, there was no longer anything to impede the intertwining
of our two bodies. No more impediments where I was concerned at least.
For they had not evaporated for the girl, who had not been drinking
port. Had she done so, and had the universe lost a certain reality in
her eyes, the long-cherished dream that might then have suddenly
appeared realizable to her would by no means perhaps have been that of
falling into my arms.

Not only were the girls few in number but at that time of year, which
was not yet the ‘season’, they stayed only briefly. I remember one with
the russet complexion of a Coleus flower, with green eyes and two russet
cheeks, whose thin, reversible face resembled the winged seeds of
certain trees. I do not know what breeze brought her to Balbec, nor what
other breeze bore her away again. So abrupt was it that for several days
I felt an unhappiness which I ventured to confess to Albertine, once I
realized that she had gone for ever.

It has to be said that several of them were either girls I did not know
at all, or ones whom I had not seen in years. Often, before meeting
them, I would write to them. What joy if their reply led me to believe
in a possible love affair! At the outset of a friendship with a woman,
even if it is not subsequently to be realized, we cannot be parted from
the first letters we have received. We want to have them always beside
us, like so many beautiful flowers we have been sent, still fresh, and
which we break off from gazing at only in order to breathe them in from
closer to. The phrase that we know by heart is pleasant to reread, and,
with those that we have learned less literally, we want to verify the
degree of affection in a certain expression. Did she write: ‘Your dear
letter’? A small disappointment in the sweetness we are breathing in, to
be attributed either to our having read too fast or to our
correspondent’s illegible handwriting; she has not put ‘and your dear
letter’, but ‘on seeing your letter’. But the rest is so affectionate.
May more such flowers come tomorrow! Then that is no longer enough, her
looks, her voice, must be set next to the written words. We arrange a
rendezvous and – without her having changed perhaps – where we had
thought, from the given description or our own personal memory, we would
be meeting the fairy Viviane we find Puss in Boots.²³ We fix a
rendezvous for the next day nevertheless, for it is after all _her_, and
what we desired was her. But these desires for a woman of whom we have
dreamed do not make the beauty of any precise feature absolutely
necessary. These desires are simply the desire for some being or other;
vague as fragrances,²⁴ as Styrax was the desire of Prothyraia, saffron
the ethereal desire, spices the desire of Hera, myrrh the fragrance of
the clouds, manna the desire of Nike, incense the fragrance of the sea.
But the fragrances of which the Orphic Hymns sing are far fewer in
number than the divinities that they cherish. Myrrh is the fragrance of
the clouds but also of Protogonos, of Neptune, of Nereus and of Leto;
incense is the fragrance of the sea, but also of the beautiful Dike, of
Themis, of Circe, of the Nine Muses, of Eos, of Mnemosyne, of the Day,
of Dikaiosyne. As for styrax, manna and spices, there could be no
telling all the divinities whom they inspire, so numerous are they.
Amphietes has all the fragrances save incense, and Gaia rejects solely
beans and spices. So also with the desires I felt for girls. Fewer in
number than they were, they turned into disappointments and
unhappinesses one of which was much like another. Myrrh I have never
wanted. I reserved that for Jupien and for the Princesse de Guermantes,
since it is the desire of Protogonos ‘of the two sexes, having the
bellow of the bull, of the countless, memorable, indescribable orgies,
descending, joyfully, to the sacrifices of the Orgiophants’.

But soon the season was in full swing; every day saw new arrivals and
for the suddenly increasing frequency of my walks, replacing the
delightful reading of the _Arabian Nights_, there was a reason devoid of
pleasure, which poisoned every one of them. The beach was now populated
by girls, and the idea put into my head by Cottard having, not furnished
me with fresh suspicions, but made me sensitive and vulnerable on that
score and careful not to allow any to form within me, as soon as a young
woman arrived in Balbec, I felt uneasy and proposed the most distant
excursions to Albertine, so that she might not make the acquaintance of
or even, if it were possible, set eyes on, the new arrival. I was
naturally more fearful still of those whose dubious ways had been
observed or whose bad reputation was known; I attempted to persuade my
loved one that this bad reputation was without foundation, was a
slander, perhaps, without admitting it to myself, out of an as yet
unconscious fear that she might try to strike up a friendship with the
depraved woman in question, or regret not being able to seek her out on
my account, or think, given the number of examples, that so widespread a
vice was not to be condemned. By denying it in each instance of guilt, I
came close to claiming that sapphism does not exist. Albertine adopted
my own incredulity in respect of this or that woman’s vice: ‘No, I think
it’s just a manner she’s trying to put on, it’s to give herself style.’
But then I would almost regret having pleaded their innocence, for it
displeased me that Albertine, formerly so severe, might think that this
‘manner’ was something sufficiently flattering, and sufficiently
advantageous, for a woman exempt from such tastes to have sought to make
it appear that she had them. I would have wished for no more women to
come to Balbec; I trembled at the thought that since this was more or
less the time when Mme Putbus was due to arrive at the Verdurins’, her
lady’s-maid, whose preferences Saint-Loup had not concealed from me,
might make an excursion as far as the beach, and, if it was on a day
when I was not at Albertine’s side, might try to corrupt her. I found
myself wondering, since Cottard had made no secret of the fact that the
Verdurins were very attached to me, and while not wishing, as he put it,
to appear to be pursuing me, would have given much to receive a visit,
whether I might not, by dint of promising to bring to them in Paris
every known Guermantes, persuade Mme Verdurin, on some pretext or other,
to warn Mme Putbus that it was impossible that they should keep her in
the house and make her leave again as quickly as possible.

In spite of these thoughts, and since it was above all the presence of
Andrée that had been worrying me, the assuagement procured by
Albertine’s words persisted for some little while longer. I knew,
moreover, that soon I would have less need of it, Andrée being due to
leave with Rosemonde and Gisèle at almost the same time as everyone
would be arriving, having only a few weeks more in the company of
Albertine. During which weeks, moreover, Albertine seemed to plan
everything she did and everything she said with a view to destroying my
suspicions, should any remain, or stopping them from reviving. She saw
to it that she was never left alone with Andrée and insisted, when we
returned home, that I should go with her all the way to her door, so
that I might come and fetch her from there when we were due to go out.
Andrée meanwhile, for her part, took equal pains and seemed to avoid
seeing Albertine. And this apparent pact between them was not the only
indication that Albertine must have informed her friend of our
conversation and asked her to be good enough to lay my absurd suspicions
to rest.

Around this time, there occurred a scandal at the Grand-Hôtel de Balbec
which was not calculated to alter the course of my torments. Bloch’s
sister had for some little time had a secret relationship with a former
actress that soon was no longer enough for them. To be seen seemed to
them to add perversity to their pleasure, and they wanted to expose
their perilous frolickings to the public gaze. It began with caresses,
that might after all be put down to an intimate friendship, in the
cardroom, around the baccarat table. Then they grew bolder. Finally, one
evening, in a not even unlit corner of the great ballroom, on a sofa,
they no more stood on ceremony than if they had been in their bed. Two
officers who were close by with their wives complained to the manager.
It was thought for a moment or two that their protest might have some
effect. But against them was the fact that, having come to Balbec for
the evening from Netteholme, where they were staying, they could be of
no possible usefulness to the manager. Whereas, without her even knowing
it, and whatever observations the manager may have made to her, there
hovered over Mlle Bloch the protection of M. Nissim Bernard. I need to
say why. M. Nissim Bernard practised the family virtues in the very
highest degree. Each year he rented in Balbec a magnificent villa for
his nephew, and no invitation could have deflected him from going back
to dine at his, which was in reality their, house. He never ate lunch at
home, however. Each day, at noon, he was at the Grand-Hôtel. For the
fact was that, just as other men keep a young dancer, he kept a
‘commis’, rather like the _chasseurs_ mentioned earlier, who put one in
mind of the young Israelites in _Esther_ and _Athalie_. Truth to tell,
the forty years that separated M. Nissim Bernard from the young commis
ought to have preserved the latter from a disagreeable contact. But as
Racine puts it so very sagaciously in those same choruses:²⁵

_Mon Dieu, qu ’une vertu naissante_

_Parmi tant de périls marche à pas incertains!_

_Qu ’une âme qui te cherche et veut être innocente_

_Trouve d’obstacle à ses desseins!_²⁶

For all that the young commis had been ‘raised far from the world’, in
the Temple Palace of Balbec, he had not followed the advice of Joad:

_Sur la richesse et l’or ne mets point ton appui._²⁷

He had resigned himself perhaps by saying: ‘The sinners cover the
earth.’ Whatever the truth of the matter, and although M. Nissim Bernard
could not have been hoping for so brief a delay, from the very first
day,

_Et soit frayeur encor ou pour le caresser,_

_De ses bras innocents il se sentit presser_.²⁸

From the second day, M. Nissim Bernard was taking the commis out, and
‘the contagion of this contact had marred his innocence’. From then on,
the young boy’s life had changed. For all that he carried the bread and
the salt, as ordered by his _chef de rang_, his whole face sang out:

_De fleurs en fleurs, de plaisirs en plaisirs_

_Promenons nos désirs._

_De nos ans passagers le nombre est incertain._

_Hâtons-nous aujourd’hui de jouir de la vie!_

_L’honneur et les emplois_

_Sont le prix d’une aveugle et douce obéissance,_

_Pour la triste innocence_

_Qui viendrait élever la voix._²⁹

From that day forward, M. Nissim Bernard had never failed to come and
occupy his seat at lunch (as someone who is keeping a ballet dancer
would have done his seat in the stalls, a ballet dancer in this case of
a strongly characterized kind that still awaits its Degas).³⁰ It was M.
Nissim Bernard’s pleasure to follow, in the dining-room and off into the
distant vistas where the cashier sat enthroned beneath her palm tree,
the manoeuvrings of this adolescent, assiduous in his attendance on one
and all, though less so with M. Nissim Bernard since the latter had been
keeping him, either because the young choirboy did not think it
necessary to evince the same friendliness towards someone by whom he
thought himself sufficiently loved, or because this love irritated him,
or because he was afraid that, once discovered, it might make him miss
other opportunities. But this coldness in fact pleased M. Nissim Bernard
by all that it concealed. Whether out of an atavistic Hebraism, or a
profanation of Christian sentiment, he took a singular pleasure in the
Racinian ceremonial, whether Jewish or Catholic. Had it been a real
performance of _Esther_ or _Athalie_, M. Bernard would have regretted
that the difference of centuries would not have allowed him to get to
know the author, Jean Racine, in order to obtain a more prominent role
for his protégé. But the ceremony of lunch not emanating from any
writer, he contented himself with being on good terms with the manager
and with Aimé, so that the ‘young Israelite’ might be promoted to the
hoped-for role of either second-in-command or even _chef de rang_. He
had been offered that of _sommelier_. But M. Bernard forced him to
refuse for he would no longer have been able to come every day and see
him running around the green dining-room and be served by him like a
stranger. And so strong was this pleasure that M. Bernard came back to
Balbec year after year and ate his lunch away from home, habits in which
M. Bloch saw, in the first, a poetic liking for the beautiful light, the
sunsets along this coast that he preferred to any other; and in the
second, the inveterate idiosyncrasy of an old bachelor.

Truth to tell, this error on the part of M. Nissim Bernard’s relations,
who did not suspect the real reason for his annual return to Balbec, and
for what the pedantic Mme Bloch called his ‘culinary nights away’, this
error was a deeper truth, to the second degree. For M. Nissim Bernard
was himself unaware of the extent to which his love of the beach at
Balbec, and of the view you got over the sea from the restaurant, and
his obsessive habits entered into his liking for keeping, like a ballet
dancer of another sort as yet lacking its Degas, one of the male
servants who were still as yet girls. And so M. Nissim Bernard
maintained excellent relations with the manager of the theatre that was
the Balbec hotel, and with Aimé, its director and stage manager – whose
role in this whole affair was not of the most pellucid. One day they
would scheme to obtain a leading role, a position as _maître d’hôtel_
perhaps. Meanwhile, M. Nissim Bernard’s pleasure, however poetical and
calmly contemplative it might be, had something of the character of
those ladies’ men – Swann in the old days, for example – who always know
that by going into society they will meet with their mistress. Hardly
would M. Nissim Bernard be seated before he saw the object of his
desires advancing on to the stage bearing in his hand fruit or cigars on
a tray. And so each morning, having kissed his niece, fretted over my
friend Bloch’s labours and fed lumps of sugar to his horses from his
outstretched palm, he made feverish haste to arrive at the Grand-Hôtel
in time for lunch. Had the house caught fire, or had his niece had a
stroke, he would no doubt have left just the same. Thus he feared like
the plague a cold that might keep him in bed – for he was a
hypochondriac – and necessitate having Aimé asked to send his young
friend round to him before tea-time.

Moreover, he loved that whole labyrinth of corridors, secret offices,
saloons, cloakrooms, larders and galleries that was the Balbec hotel. He
had the atavistic love of an Oriental for harems, and when he left in
the evenings, he was to be seen furtively exploring its byways.

Whereas, venturing all the way down into the basements, and trying in
spite of everything not to be seen and to avoid scandal, M. Nissim
Bernard put you in mind, in his quest for young Levites, of these lines
from _La Juive_:³¹

_O Dieu de nos pères,_

_Parmi nous descends,_

_Cache nos mystères_

_A l’oeil des méchants!_³²

I, on the contrary, was going up to the room of two sisters who had
accompanied an old foreign lady to Balbec, as ladies’-maids. They were
two what in hotel parlance are known as _courrières_, or guests’
servants, and in that of Françoise, who imagined that a _courrier_ or
_courrière_ is there to run _courses_ or errands, two _coursières_ or
‘coursers’. Hotels, for their part, have remained, more nobly, in the
days when they used to sing: ‘_C’est un courrier de cabinet_.’³³

In spite of the difficulty there was for a guest to go into the
_courrières_’ rooms, and vice versa, I had very soon struck up a very
lively though very pure friendship with these two young people, Mlle
Marie Gineste and Mme Céleste Albaret.³⁴ Born at the foot of the high
mountains in the centre of France, on the banks of streams and torrents
(the water even passed underneath their family home, where a mill-wheel
turned, and which had several times been devastated by flooding), they
seemed to have preserved their character. Marie Gineste was more
uniformly quick and staccato, Céleste Albaret softer and more languid,
slack like the waters of a lake, but with recurring fits of a terrible
turbulence when her fury recalled the dangers of those spates and
whirlpools that carry everything away and lay everywhere waste. They
often used to come and visit me in the mornings, when I was still in
bed. I have never known people so wilfully ignorant, who had learned
absolutely nothing at school, yet whose language had something so
literary about it that, had it not been for the almost primitive nature
of their accent, you would have thought their words affected. With a
familiarity on which I am not embroidering, and despite the praises
(which are here in order to celebrate, not myself but the strange genius
of Céleste) and the criticisms, both equally false, but perfectly
sincere, which such remarks appear to imply in my regard, as I was
dipping croissants in my milk, Céleste would say to me: ‘Oh, little
black devil with hair like a jay, oh what deep mischief! I don’t know
what your mother was thinking of when she made you, because you’re just
like a bird. Look, Marie, wouldn’t you say he’s smoothing down his
feathers, and turning his neck so supply? He looks so light, you’d think
he was busy learning to fly. Oh, you’re lucky that the ones who created
you had you born into the ranks of the rich; what’d have become of you,
wasteful as you are? Look, he’s throwing away his croissant because it
touched the bed. Oh no, look how he’s spilling his milk, wait till I put
a napkin on you because you wouldn’t know how to go about it, I’ve never
seen anyone so silly and so clumsy as you.’ And then you heard the more
regular torrent-sound of Marie Gineste, who was furious and took her
sister to task: ‘Come, Céleste, will you be quiet? Are you crazy talking
to Monsieur in that way?’ All Céleste did was to smile; and since I
hated having a napkin tied on: ‘No, I’m not, Marie, look at him, whoosh!
he’s sitting straight up now like a snake. A real snake, I tell you.’
She did not stint, indeed, on these zoological comparisons, for
according to her one never knew when I was asleep, I fluttered about all
night long like a moth, and during the day I was as quick as the
squirrels, ‘you know, Marie, like you see at home, so agile you can’t
follow them even with your eyes. – But, Céleste, you know he doesn’t
like having a napkin on when he’s eating. – It’s not that he doesn’t
like it, it’s to tell you there’s no changing what he’s made up his mind
to. He’s a lord and master and wants to show he’s a lord and master. You
can change the sheets ten times a day if you have to, but he won’t have
given in. Yesterday’s lasted the course, but today they’ve only just
been put on and already they’ll have to be changed. Oh, I was right to
say he wasn’t made to be born amongst the poor. Look, his hair’s
standing up, it’s puffing up with anger like the feathers on a bird.
Poor little dickybird!’ At this Marie was not alone in protesting, I did
so, too, for I did not at all feel myself to be a lord and master. But
Céleste never believed that my modesty was genuine and, cutting me
short: ‘Oh, bag of tricks, oh, sweet, yes, and treacherous, of all the
cunning, lowdown…! Oh Molière!’ (This was the only writer’s name that
she knew, but she applied it to me, meaning by it someone who would be
capable simultaneously of composing plays and performing in them.)
‘Céleste!’ cried Marie imperiously who, not knowing the name of Molière,
was afraid it might be some further insult. Céleste went back to
smiling: ‘Haven’t you seen the photograph in his drawer then of when he
was a child? He wanted to make us believe they always dressed him very
simply. And there, with his little cane, he’s nothing but fur and lace,
like no prince ever had. But that’s nothing compared with his immense
majesty and his even more profound goodness. – So now you’re rummaging
in his drawers,’ scolded Marie the mountain torrent. To allay Marie’s
fears, I asked her what she thought about what M. Nissim Bernard had
been doing. ‘Oh, Monsieur, those are things I couldn’t have believed
they existed; I needed to come here’, and, for once outdoing Céleste
with a more profound observation: ‘But there you are, Monsieur, you can
never know what there may be in a life.’ To change the subject, I talked
to her about my father’s life, who used to work day and night. ‘Oh,
Monsieur, those are lives where people keep nothing for themselves, not
a single minute, not a single pleasure; everything, everything entirely
is a sacrifice for others, those are _given_ lives… Look, Céleste, just
to put his hand on the coverlet to pick up his croissant, such
refinement! He can do the most insignificant things, you’d think the
whole nobility of France, all the way to the Pyrenees, was changing its
position in every one of his movements.’

Crushed by this far from truthful portrait, I was silent; Céleste saw
this as one more stratagem: ‘Oh, brow that looks so pure yet hides so
many things, cool and friendly cheeks like the inside of an almond,
little satin hands all plush, nails like claws, and so on. I say, Marie,
look at him drinking his milk so composedly it makes me want to say my
prayers. How serious he looks! Now’s when they should make his portrait
right enough. He’s the complete child. Is it drinking milk like them
that’s kept you their clear complexion? Oh, youth, oh, what pretty skin!
You’ll never grow old. You’re lucky, you’ll never have to raise your
hand against anyone because you’ve got eyes that know how to impose
their will. And look there, now he’s angry. He’s standing up, straight
as what there’s no denying.’

Françoise did not at all like the women she called the two wheedlers
coming to engage me in conversation like this. The manager, whose staff
he made keep watch on everything that was going on, even pointed
solemnly out to me that it was undignified for a guest to talk to the
_courrières_. But I, who found the ‘wheedlers’ superior to all the
female guests in the hotel, merely laughed in his face, convinced that
he would not understand my explanations. And the two sisters returned.
‘Look, Marie, at those delicate features. Oh perfect miniature, finer
than the most precious miniature you’d see in a glass case, for he’s got
the movements, and words to make you listen to him for days and nights
on end.’

It was a wonder that a foreign lady had been able to bring them, for,
without knowing any history or geography, they confidently detested the
English, the Germans, the Russians, the Italians, those foreign
‘vermin’, and liked, with some exceptions, only the French. Their faces
had preserved the moisture of the malleable clay of their rivers to such
an extent that, as soon as mention was made of a foreigner staying in
the hotel, in order to repeat what he had said, Céleste and Marie
applied his face to their faces, their mouths became his mouth, their
eyes his eyes, and you would have wanted to preserve these admirable
stage masks. Céleste even, while pretending merely to be repeating what
the manager had said, or one or other of my friends, would, without
appearing to, insert fictitious remarks into her brief narrative, in
which were mischievously depicted all the defects of Bloch, or the First
President, and the like. In the form of an account of a simple errand
that she had obligingly carried out, you got an inimitable portrait.
They never read anything, not even a newspaper. One day, however, they
found a book on my bed. It was some admirable but obscure poems by
Saint-Léger Léger.³⁵ Céleste read a few pages and said to me: ‘But are
you quite sure they’re poetry, aren’t they more like riddles?’
Obviously, for someone who had learned only one poem in her childhood,
‘_Ici-bas tous les lilas meurent_’,³⁶ there was a lack of transition. I
think that their obstinate refusal to learn had something to do with
their unhealthy native region. Yet they were as well endowed as a poet,
with more modesty than these generally possess. For if Céleste had said
something remarkable and, unable to remember it properly, I asked her to
remind me of it, she assured me she had forgotten. They will never read
books, but nor will they ever write any.

Françoise was quite impressed on learning that the two brothers of these
very simple women had married, one of them the niece of the Archbishop
of Tours, the other a relation of the Bishop of Rodez. To the manager,
this would have conveyed nothing. Céleste sometimes reproached her
husband for not understanding her, and I was astonished for my part that
he was able to put up with her. For there were certain moments when,
quivering, furious, all-destroying, she was hateful. They claim that the
saline liquid which is our blood is only what survives within us of our
original element, the sea. In the same way, I believe that Céleste, not
only in her rages but also in her moments of depression, had preserved
the rhythm of her native streams. When she was exhausted, it was after
their fashion; she had truly run dry. Nothing then could have brought
her back to life. Then all of a sudden the circulation would resume in
her tall, slight, magnificent body. The water flowed in the opaline
transparency of her blueish skin. It smiled in the sunlight and became
bluer still. At such moments she was truly celestial.

For all that Bloch’s family had never suspected the reason why his uncle
never lunched at home, but had accepted it from the outset as an old
bachelor’s idiosyncrasy, required of him perhaps by a liaison with some
actress, everything that concerned M. Nissim Bernard was ‘taboo’ for the
manager of the Balbec hotel. And this was why, without even having
referred the matter to the uncle, he had not dared in the end to find
fault with the niece, while advising her to a certain circumspection. So
the girl and her friend, who for several days had imagined that they
would be banned from the casino and the Grand-Hôtel, finding that
everything had been arranged, were happy to demonstrate to the
paterfamiliases who had shunned them that they could do whatever they
liked with impunity. Not that they went so far of course as to repeat
the public exhibition that had revolted everyone. But gradually and
imperceptibly they resumed their old ways. And one evening as I was
leaving the casino more dead than alive with Albertine, and Bloch, whom
we had met, they came past, intertwined, kissing without stopping, and,
having drawn level with us, gave vent to giggles, laughter and indecent
shouts. Bloch looked down so as to appear not to have recognized his
sister, while I was in torments at the thought that this private and
atrocious language was perhaps directed at Albertine.

Another incident fixed my preoccupations even more firmly in the
direction of Gomorrah. On the beach I had seen a beautiful young woman,
slender and pale, whose eyes disposed, around their centres, rays so
geometrically luminous that, faced by her gaze, you thought of a
constellation. I reflected on how much more beautiful this girl was than
Albertine and how it would be more sensible to give the other up. At the
very most, this beautiful young woman’s face had been subjected to an
invisible planing by a life of great degradation, of the constant
acceptance of coarse expedients, so that her eyes, though nobler than
the rest of her face, had to radiate only appetite and lust. But the
next day, this young woman being sat some distance from us in the
casino, I could see that she never stopped letting the alternating and
revolving light from her glances rest on Albertine. You would have said
she was signalling to her, as if with the aid of a lighthouse. I was
suffering lest my loved one saw that she was the object of so much
attention, and afraid that these endlessly kindled glances might carry
the conventional meaning of a lovers’ assignation for the following day.
Who knows? that assignation might not perhaps be the first. The young
woman with the radiant eyes might have come to Balbec another year. It
was perhaps because Albertine had already yielded to her desires or to
those of a friend that the latter felt free to address these dazzling
signals to her. They were doing more then than demand something for the
present, their authority for that had come from good times in the past.

In that case, the assignation would not be the first but a continuation
of games played together in other years. And indeed, the glances were
not saying ‘Will you?’ The moment the young woman had caught sight of
Albertine, she had turned her head all the way round and shone glances
at her laden with memories, as though she were afraid and astounded that
my loved one should not remember. Albertine, who could see her very
clearly, remained phlegmatically without moving, with the result that
the other, with the same sort of tact as a man who sees his former
mistress with another lover, stopped looking at her or taking any more
notice of her than if she had not existed.

But a few days later I received proof of this young woman’s proclivities
and also of the probability that she had known Albertine in the old
days. Often, when, in the hall of the casino, two girls felt desire for
one another, there was produced something like a phenomenon of light, a
sort of trail of phosphorescence leading from one to the other. Let me
say in passing that it is with the aid of such materializations,
imponderable though they be, by these astral signs setting fire to a
whole portion of the atmosphere, that, in every town and every village,
that Gomorrah, having been scattered, tends to reunite its separated
members, to reconstitute the biblical city, while everywhere the same
efforts are being pursued, if only with a view to an intermittent
rebuilding, by the nostalgic, the hypocritical and sometimes by the
courageous exiles from Sodom.

On one occasion I saw the unknown woman whom Albertine had appeared not
to recognize, just as Bloch’s cousin was passing. Stars came into the
young woman’s eyes, but it was easy to tell that she did not know the
young Israelite damsel. She was seeing her for the first time, had felt
desire, little doubt about that, but not at all the same certainty as in
respect of Albertine, Albertine on whose camaraderie she must have so
much been counting that, faced by her indifference, she had experienced
the surprise of a stranger familiar with Paris but who does not live
there and who, having returned to spend a few weeks, finds that a bank
has gone up on the site of the little theatre where he had been in the
habit of spending happy evenings.

Bloch’s cousin went and sat at a table, where she looked at a magazine.
Soon the young woman came and sat down beside her wearing an absent air.
But beneath the table you would soon have been able to see their feet
becoming agitated and then their legs and hands, which were merged.
Words followed, a conversation got under way, and the young woman’s
innocent husband, who had been looking for her everywhere, was
astonished to find her making plans for that same evening with a girl he
did not know. His wife introduced Bloch’s cousin to him as a childhood
friend, under some unintelligible name, for she had forgotten to ask her
what her name was. But the presence of the husband advanced their
intimacy by a step, for they addressed one another as _tu_, having met
at the convent, an incident at which they laughed heartily later on, as
well as at the deluded husband, with a merriment that was an opportunity
for further intimacies.

As for Albertine, I cannot say that anywhere, in the casino or on the
beach, her manner towards another girl was too free. I found it in fact
excessively distant and insignificant, seeming more like a stratagem
intended to deflect suspicion than the effect of a good upbringing. She
had a quick, icy, proper way of answering this girl or that in a very
loud voice: ‘Yes, I’ll be going to play tennis around five. I shall have
my bathe tomorrow morning around eight,’ and at once leaving the person
to whom she had just said this, which looked horribly like an attempt to
mislead, and either to be arranging a rendezvous, or rather, having
arranged one sotto voce, to be saying these, in effect insignificant,
words loudly so as not to ‘draw attention to herself’. And when next I
saw her fetch her bicycle and ride off at top speed, I could not help
thinking that she was on her way to join the girl to whom she had barely
spoken.

At most, whenever some beautiful young woman got out of a motor-car at
the corner of the beach, Albertine could not help looking round. And she
would immediately justify herself: ‘I was looking at the new flag
they’ve put up in front of the baths. They might have spent a bit more.
The other one was pretty moth-eaten. But I really think this one’s even
shabbier.’

On one occasion, Albertine was not content to remain indifferent, and I
was all the more unhappy. She knew it bothered me that she might
sometimes meet a friend of her aunt’s, who ‘had a certain reputation’
and sometimes came to spend two or three days with Mme Bontemps.
Albertine had been kind enough to tell me she would not acknowledge her.
And when this woman came to Incarville, Albertine said: ‘By the way, you
know she’s here. Did anyone tell you?’ as if to demonstrate she was not
seeing her on the sly. One day as she was saying this, she added: ‘Yes,
I met her on the beach and on purpose, out of rudeness, I practically
brushed against her as I passed, I jostled her.’ As Albertine said this
there came back into my head some words of Mme Bontemps to which I had
never given a second thought, when she had said to Mme Swann in my
presence how impudent her niece Albertine was, as if this were a virtue,
and how she had told some functionary or other’s wife that the latter’s
father had been a kitchen boy. But a remark made by the woman we love
does not preserve its purity for long; it spoils, it goes off. One or
two evenings later, Albertine’s words came back to me and what they
seemed to signify was no longer the bad upbringing that was a source of
pride to her – and which could but make me smile – but something else,
and that Albertine, perhaps even without any precise object, in order to
excite the woman’s senses or to remind her mischievously of earlier
propositions, accepted perhaps in the old days, had brushed quickly
against her, had thought that I had perhaps found out about it, since it
had been done in public, and had wanted to forestall an unfavourable
interpretation.

But the jealousy caused in me by the women whom Albertine had perhaps
loved was in any case about abruptly to cease.

We were, Albertine and I, in front of the Balbec station on the little
local railway. We had had ourselves driven there by the hotel omnibus,
on account of the weather. Not far away from us was M. Nissim Bernard,
who had a black eye. He had recently been unfaithful to the choirboy
from _Athalie_ with the boy from quite a thriving farm in the vicinity,
‘Aux Cerisiers’. This red-faced boy, with his blunt features, seemed
absolutely to have a tomato for a head. An exactly similar tomato served
his twin brother for a head. For the disinterested onlooker, what is
rather beautiful about these perfect resemblances between two twins is
that nature, as if it had been momentarily industrialized, seems to be
turning out similar products. M. Nissim Bernard, alas, saw things from a
different point of view, and the resemblance was purely external. Tomato
No. 2 found frenetic enjoyment in giving delight exclusively to the
ladies, tomato No. i was nothing loth to condescend to the tastes of
certain gentlemen. Now each time M. Bernard, shaken, as if by a reflex,
by the memory of good times spent with tomato No. 1, presented himself
at ‘Aux Cerisiers’, the short-sighted (and short-sightedness was not
essential in order to get them confused) old Israelite, unwittingly
playing the role of Amphitryon,³⁷ would address the twin brother and say
to him: ‘Will you meet me this evening?’ He at once received a good
‘hiding’. This might even be repeated in the course of the same meal,
when he pursued with the one topics started on with the other.
Eventually, by an association of ideas, he grew so to dislike tomatoes,
even the edible kind, that every time he heard a traveller ordering them
next to him at the Grand-Hôtel, he would whisper: ‘Forgive me for
addressing you without having been introduced, Monsieur. But I heard you
ordering tomatoes. They’re off today. I tell you this for your own good
as it’s all one to me, I never eat them.’ The stranger would thank this
disinterested and philanthropic neighbour effusively, call the waiter
back and pretend to be changing his mind: ‘No, definitely, no tomatoes.’
Aimé, for whom this was a familiar scene, would laugh to himself and
think: ‘He’s a sly old fox, M. Bernard, he’s found a way of getting the
order changed again.’ M. Bernard, as he waited for the tram, which was
late, was not keen to greet Albertine and me, on account of his black
eye. We were even less keen to speak to him. It would have been almost
inevitable, however, if, at that moment, a bicycle had not borne down on
us at high speed; from it jumped the ‘lift’, out of breath. Mme Verdurin
had telephoned shortly after our departure to get me to go to dinner in
two days’ time; it will soon be seen why. Then, having given me the
details of this telephone-call, the ‘lift’ left us and, like those
democratic ‘employees’ who affect independence vis-à-vis the
bourgeoisie, and re-establish the principle of authority among
themselves, meaning that the hall-porter and the coachman might be
displeased were he to be late, he added: ‘I’m off on account of my
chiefs.’

Albertine’s friends had gone off for some time. I wanted to amuse her.
Even supposing that she might have derived some happiness from spending
the afternoons alone with me, in Balbec, I knew that it never allows
itself to be possessed totally and that Albertine, still at that age
(which some never pass beyond) when we have yet to discover that this
imperfection depends on the one who is experiencing the happiness, not
on the one who is giving it, might have been tempted to trace the cause
of her disappointment back to me. I preferred that she should impute it
to circumstances which, having been arranged by me, would leave no
opportunity for our being alone together, while preventing her from
remaining in the casino or on the esplanade without me. And so on the
day in question I had asked her to go with me to Doncières, where I
would be going to visit Saint-Loup. In this same intention of keeping
her occupied, I advised painting, which she had learned in the old days.
While working, she would not be asking herself whether she was happy or
unhappy. I would gladly also have taken her to dine now and again at the
Verdurins’ or the Cambremers’, who would certainly, both of them, have
gladly entertained a friend introduced by me, but I first had to be sure
that Mme Putbus was not yet at La Raspelière. It was really only on the
spot that I could find out, and I knew in advance that in two days’ time
Albertine would be obliged to go off round about with her aunt, I had
taken advantage of this to send a telegram to Mme Verdurin asking
whether she could receive me on Wednesday. If Mme Putbus was there, I
would contrive to meet her lady’s-maid, ascertain whether there was a
risk of her coming to Balbec, and in that case find out when, so as to
take Albertine well away on the day in question. The little local
railway, making a loop that had not existed when I took it with my
grandmother, now went through Doncières-la-Goupil, a large station from
which important trains left, notably the express by which I had come to
visit Saint-Loup from Paris, and had then returned by. Because of the
bad weather, the omnibus from the Grand-Hôtel took us, Albertine and me,
to the station for the little tram, Balbec-Plage.

The little train was not yet there, but you could see the slow, lazy
plume of smoke that it had left behind along the way, and which now,
reduced to its own resources as a not very mobile cloud, was slowly
climbing the green slopes of the Criquetot cliffs. At last, the little
tram, which it had preceded only to then take a vertical direction,
arrived in its turn, slowly. The passengers who would be catching it
stood aside to give it room, but unhurriedly, knowing that they had to
deal with a debonair, almost human stroller which, guided, like the
bicycle of a learner, by the indulgent signals of the station-master,
and under the powerful tutelage of the engine-driver, was in no danger
of running anyone down and would have stopped wherever you wanted.

My telegram explained the Verdurins’ telephone-call and it was all the
more timely in that Wednesday (the next day but one happened to be a
Wednesday) was the day on which Mme Verdurin, at La Raspelière as in
Paris, gave a big dinner party, which I had not known. Mme Verdurin did
not give ‘dinners’, but she had ‘Wednesdays’. Her Wednesdays were a work
of art. While knowing that there was nothing to equal them elsewhere,
Mme Verdurin introduced fine distinctions between them. ‘This last
Wednesday wasn’t up to the one before, she would say. But I think the
next’ll be one of the most successful I’ve ever given.’ She sometimes
went so far as to confess: ‘This Wednesday wasn’t worthy of the others.
In return, I’ve got a big surprise for you for the one after that.’ In
the final weeks of the season in Paris, before leaving for the country,
the Patronne would announce that the Wednesdays were ending. It was an
opportunity to spur on the faithful: ‘There are only three Wednesdays
left, there are only two more, she would say, in the same tone of voice
as if the world were about to end. You’re not going to let me down next
Wednesday for the closure.’ But this closure was a sham, for she would
warn them: ‘Now, officially, there are no more Wednesdays. That was the
last for this year. But I shall be here all the same on Wednesdays.
We’ll have Wednesday amongst ourselves; who knows? these little intimate
Wednesdays will perhaps be the pleasantest.’ At La Raspelière, the
Wednesdays were necessarily restricted, and since, according as some
friend had been met with when passing through, and had been invited for
one evening or another, almost every day was a Wednesday. ‘I don’t
recall exactly the names of the guests, but I know Mme the Marquise de
Camembert is one of them,’ the ‘lift’ had said to me; the memory of our
discussions relating to the Cambremers had not succeeded in finally
supplanting that of the old word, whose familiar syllables, so full of
meaning, had come to the aid of the young employee when he was having
trouble with this difficult name, and had been instantly preferred and
readopted by him, not out of laziness or as an old, ineradicable usage,
but because of the need for logic and clarity that they satisfied.

We made haste to find an empty carriage where I would be able to kiss
Albertine all through the journey. Not having found one, we got into a
compartment where was already installed a lady with an enormous, ugly,
old face, and a mannish expression, very overdressed, who was reading
the _Revue des Deux Mondes_. For all her vulgarity, she was pretentious
in her gestures, and I amused myself by wondering to which social
category she might belong; I at once concluded that she must be the
manageress of some large brothel, a madam on her travels. Her face and
mannerisms proclaimed it. I had simply been unaware up until now that
such ladies might read the _Revue des Deux Mondes_. Albertine drew my
attention to her, not without winking as she smiled at me. The lady wore
an extremely dignified air; and as, on my side, I carried within me the
knowledge that I had been invited for the next day, at the terminus of
the little railway, to the celebrated Mme Verdurin’s, that at an
intermediate station Robert de Saint-Loup was waiting for me, and that a
little further on I would have given Mme de Cambremer great pleasure by
going to stay at Féterne, my eyes sparkled with irony as I contemplated
this self-important lady, who seemed to think that, what with her
studied attire, the feathers in her hat, and her _Revue des Deux
Mondes_, she was a more considerable personage than myself. I was hoping
that this lady would not remain much longer than had M. Nissim Bernard,
and that she would at least be getting out at Toutainville, but no. The
train stopped at Epreville, she remained sitting. Similarly at
Montmartin-sur-Mer, at Parville-la-Bingard, at Incarville, so that in
despair, once the train had left Saint-Frichoux, which was the last
station before Doncières, I began to twine myself around Albertine
without concerning myself with this lady. At Doncières, Saint-Loup had
come to wait for me at the station, with the greatest difficulty, he
told me, for living as he was at his aunt’s, my telegram had only just
now reached him and, not having been able to organize his time in
advance, he could only devote an hour to me. That hour appeared much too
long for me, alas, for no sooner had she alighted from the carriage than
Albertine’s attention was all for Saint-Loup. She would not talk with
me, scarcely answered if I addressed her, pushed me away when I
approached. With Robert on the other hand, she laughed her temptress’s
laugh, talked volubly, played with the dog he had brought, and, in
teasing the animal, brushed deliberately against its master. I recalled
that on the day when Albertine had let herself be kissed by me for the
first time, I had had a smile of gratitude for the unknown seducer who
had produced so profound a modification in her and so greatly simplified
my task. I thought of him now with horror. Robert must have realized
that I was not indifferent to Albertine, for he did not respond to her
flirting, which put her in a bad mood with me; then he spoke to me as if
I were alone, which, once she had noticed it, made me rise again in her
esteem. Robert asked me whether I would not like to try and find, among
the friends with whom he had made me dine each evening in Doncières when
I was staying there, those who were still there. And since he was
inclined himself to the kind of irritating pretentiousness that he
disapproved of: ‘What was the point of “turning on the charm” for them
so persistently if you don’t want to meet them again?’ I turned down his
proposal because I did not want to risk being parted from Albertine, but
also because I was now detached from them. From them, that is to say,
from myself. We desire passionately that there should be another life in
which we would be similar to what we are here below. But we do not
reflect that, even without waiting for that other life, but in this one,
after a few years, we are unfaithful to what we have been, to what we
had wanted to remain immortally. Even without supposing that death might
modify us more than the changes that occur in the course of a lifetime,
if in that other life we were to meet the self that we have been, we
would turn away from ourselves as from those people to whom we have been
close but whom we have not seen for a long time – those friends of
Saint-Loup’s, for example, that I was so pleased to find again every
evening at the Faisan Doré but whose conversation I would now find
simply out of place and an embarrassment. In this respect, and because I
preferred not to go and rediscover what had pleased me there, a walk
through Doncières might have seemed to me to prefigure my arrival in
paradise. We dream a great deal of paradise, or rather of numerous
successive paradises, but they are all, long before we die, paradises
lost, in which we would feel lost.

He left us at the station. ‘But you may have nearly an hour to wait, he
said. If you spend it here you’ll no doubt meet my uncle Charlus, who’s
taking the train to Paris again this afternoon, ten minutes before
yours. I’ve already said my goodbyes to him because I’m obliged to be
back before the time of his train. I wasn’t able to talk to him about
you because I hadn’t yet had your telegram.’ To the reproaches I
directed at Albertine once Saint-Loup had left us, she replied that she
had wanted, by her coldness towards me, to erase any ideas he might have
chanced to get if, just as the train was stopping, he had seen me
leaning against her with my arm around her waist. He had indeed remarked
this position (I had not noticed him, otherwise I would have been
sitting more correctly at Albertine’s side) and had had time to say into
my ear: ‘So, are these the very stuck-up girls you talked about, who
wouldn’t associate with Mlle de Stermaria because they didn’t like the
look of her?’ I had indeed told Robert, and in all sincerity, when I
went from Paris to visit him in Doncières, and as we were talking again
about Balbec, that there was nothing to be done with Albertine, that she
was virtue itself. And now that I had long since learned for myself that
this was not so, I wanted even more for Robert to believe it was true.
It would have been enough for me to tell Robert that I loved Albertine.
He was one of those people who are able to deny themselves a pleasure in
order to spare their friend sufferings they would experience as if they
were their own. ‘Yes, she’s very childish. But you don’t know anything
about her? I added anxiously. – Nothing, except that I saw you sat there
like two lovers.’

‘Your attitude erased nothing at all,’ I said to Albertine once
Saint-Loup had left us. ‘It’s true, she said, I was clumsy, I’ve made
you suffer, I’m much more unhappy about that than you. You’ll see, I’ll
never be like that again; forgive me,’ she said, holding out her hand to
me with a sad expression. At that moment, from the back of the
waiting-room in which we were sitting, I saw, followed a little way
behind by a porter carrying his bags, M. de Charlus go slowly past.
In Paris, where I encountered him only at soirées, motionless, tightly
buttoned into his evening dress, maintained in the vertical position by
a haughty straightening of his back, the impulse to attract and the
rocket flight of his conversation, I had not realized to what extent he
had aged. Now, in a light-coloured travelling suit that made him look
fatter, waddling as he walked, swinging a belly that was becoming a
paunch and an almost symbolic behind, the cruelty of the broad daylight
had broken down, into rouge on his lips, into rice powder fixed by cold
cream on the tip of his nose, into black on the dyed moustaches whose
ebony colour contrasted with his greying hair, everything that in an
artificial light would have seemed to be enlivening the complexion of
someone still young.

Even as I talked with him, only briefly, because of his train, I was
looking at Albertine’s carriage so as to signal to her that I was
coming. When I turned back towards M. de Charlus, he asked me to be good
enough to call over a soldier, a relation of his, who was on the other
side of the line exactly as if he were going to get into our train, but
in the opposite direction, that leading away from Balbec. ‘He’s in the
regimental band, M. de Charlus said. Since you have the good fortune to
be young enough, and I the nuisance of being old enough, for you to be
able to spare me crossing all the way over there…’ I made it my duty to
go towards the soldier indicated and could see, indeed, from the lyres
sewn on to his collar, that he was a bandsman. But how great was my
surprise, and I may say my pleasure, when, just as I was about to
discharge my commission, I recognized Morel, the son of my uncle’s
valet, who brought back so many memories! I forgot to carry out M. de
Charlus’s commission. ‘What, are you in Doncières? – Yes, and I’ve been
incorporated in the band, in the percussion.’ But he answered me in a
curt, haughty tone. He had become a real ‘poseur’ and the sight of me,
reminding him as it did of his father’s profession, was obviously
disagreeable to him. I suddenly saw M. de Charlus bearing down on us.
The delay had evidently made him impatient. ‘I’d like to hear a bit of
music this evening, he said to Morel, without any preamble, I’ll give
500 francs for the evening, that might be of some interest to one of
your friends, if you have any in the band.’ For all that I was familiar
with M. de Charlus’ insolence, I was amazed that he should not even have
greeted his young friend. The Baron left me no time for reflection, in
any case. Holding out his hand affectionately: ‘_Au revoir_, dear boy,’
he said, to signify that all that remained was to go. I had in any case
left my dear Albertine on her own for quite long enough. ‘You know, I
said to her, as we got back into the carriage, the life of a resort and
the life of travel make me realize that the theatre of the world has
fewer sets at its disposal than actors and fewer actors than
“situations”. – For what reason do you say that? – Because M. de Charlus
has just asked me to send one of his friends to him who, at this very
instant, on the platform of the station here, I’ve just recognized as a
friend of mine, too.’ But even as I said this, I was trying to think how
the Baron might have met Morel. The social disproportion, which I had
not at first considered, was too vast. My first idea was that it had
been through Jupien, whose daughter, it will be remembered, had seemed
very taken with the violinist. What had amazed me, however, was that,
having to leave for Paris in five minutes, the Baron should have asked
to hear some music in Doncières. But seeing Jupien’s daughter again in
my memory, I was beginning to think that ‘recognitions’, a lame
expedient in works of artifice, might on the contrary express an
important element in real life, were we able to attain to the true
romance of it, when I had a sudden flash of inspiration and realized I
had been very naïve. M. de Charlus had never in his life met Morel, nor
Morel M. de Charlus, who, dazzled but also intimidated by a soldier,
even by one wearing only lyres, had, in his agitation, commandeered me
to bring him someone he had not suspected that I knew. At all events,
the offer of five hundred francs must have made up in Morel’s case for
the absence of any previous connection, for I could see them continuing
to talk without reflecting that they were next to our tramcar. And
recalling the manner in which M. de Charlus had come towards Morel and
me, I seized on the resemblance to certain of his kinsmen when they
picked up women in the street. The intended target had simply changed
sex. After a certain age, and even if our inner development varies, the
more we become ourselves, the more are family characteristics
accentuated. For, while maintaining the harmonious design of its
tapestry, Nature breaks up the monotony of the composition by the
variety in the faces that it inserts. Moreover, the hauteur with which
M. de Charlus had looked the violinist up and down is relative,
according to the vantage point we adopt. It would have been recognized
by three out of four society people, who bowed to him, but not by the
chief of police, who, a few years later, was to put him under
surveillance.

‘The Paris train is signalled, Monsieur,’ said the porter who was
carrying the bags. ‘But I’m not catching the train, put all that in the
cloakroom, confound it!’ said M. de Charlus, giving the porter twenty
francs, who was stupefied by this volte-face but enchanted by the tip.
Such generosity at once attracted a flower-seller. ‘Buy my carnations,
see, this beautiful rose, _mon bon Monsieur_, it’ll bring you good
luck.’ M. de Charlus, growing impatient, handed her forty sous, in
exchange for which the woman offered him her blessing and once again her
flowers. ‘God, if only she’d leave us alone,’ said M. de Charlus,
addressing himself in an ironic, complaining tone, like a man all on
edge, to Morel, in appealing to whom for support he found a certain
comfort. ‘What we have to say is rather complicated as it is.’ Perhaps,
the railwayman not yet being too far away, M. de Charlus was not keen to
have a large audience, or perhaps these parenthetical words allowed his
haughty timidity not to broach the request for a rendezvous too
directly. The musician, turning with a frank, imperative and resolute
air towards the flower-seller, raised a palm towards her which thrust
her away and signified that they did not want any of her flowers and
that she should remove herself forthwith. M. de Charlus was in ecstasies
at the sight of this virile, authoritative gesture, executed by the
graceful hand for which it should as yet have been too heavy, too
massively brutal, with a precocious firmness and suppleness that lent
this as yet beardless adolescent the air of a young David capable of
engaging Goliath in combat. Mixed involuntarily in with the Baron’s
admiration was the smile that we experience on seeing an expression on
the face of a child that is too solemn for its years. ‘Here’s someone
I’d like to be accompanied by on my travels and helped by in my business
affairs. How he would simplify my life!’ M. de Charlus said to himself.

The Paris train (which the Baron did not take) left. Then Albertine and
I got into ours, without my knowing what had become of M. de Charlus and
Morel. ‘We mustn’t ever be angry any more, I ask you to forgive me once
again, Albertine repeated, referring to the Saint-Loup incident. We must
always both be kind, she said fondly. As for your friend Saint-Loup, if
you think he interests me in the very slightest, you’re quite wrong. The
one thing that attracts me about him is that he seems to be so fond of
you. – He’s a very good fellow,’ I said, carefully avoiding lending
Robert any imaginary superior qualities, as I should not have failed to
do, out of friendship for him, had I been with anyone other than
Albertine. ‘He’s an excellent person, open, devoted, loyal, whom you can
rely on for everything.’ In saying this, restrained by my jealousy, I
was confining myself to speaking the truth about Saint-Loup, but it was
certainly the truth that I spoke. But it had been expressed in exactly
the same terms as Mme de Villeparisis had employed in talking to me of
him, when I did not as yet know him, imagined him to be very different,
very haughty, and used to tell myself: ‘People think him kind because
he’s a great nobleman.’ Similarly, when she had said to me, ‘He’d be so
pleased’, I imagined, having caught sight of him in front of the hotel,
ready to drive off, that his aunt’s words were a mere social
commonplace, intended to flatter me. But I had then realized that she
had spoken sincerely, thinking of what interested me, of my reading, and
because she knew that that was what Saint-Loup liked, just as I was to
have occasion to say sincerely to someone who was writing a history of
his ancestor, La Rochefoucauld, the author of the _Maxims_,³⁸ and who
would have liked to approach Robert for his advice, ‘He’ll be so
pleased.’ The fact was that I had learned to know him. But on meeting
him that first time, I had not believed that an intelligence akin to my
own could be swathed in so much outward elegance of dress and attitude.
From his plumage, I had adjudged him to be from another species. It was
Albertine now who, partly perhaps because Saint-Loup, out of kindness
for me, had been so distant with her, said what I had once thought: ‘Oh,
he’s as devoted as that! I notice people always discover all the virtues
in the people who come from the Faubourg Saint-Germain.’ Now, that
Saint-Loup was from the Faubourg Saint-Germain was something that had
not once crossed my mind during those years when, divesting himself of
his prestige, he had displayed his virtues to me. A change of
perspective from which to regard people, already more striking in
friendship than in any mere social connection, but how much more so
still in love, when desire sets the first signs of indifference on so
vast a scale, magnifies them to such proportions, that it had taken a
lot less than that shown at the outset by Saint-Loup to make me believe
myself scorned at first by Albertine, to imagine her girl-friends to be
wonderfully inhuman creatures, and to put Elstir’s verdict down, when he
said of the little gang, altogether in the same spirit as Mme de
Villeparisis of Saint-Loup, ‘They’re good girls’, simply to the
indulgence we feel towards beauty and a certain elegance. And was this
not the verdict I would gladly have delivered when I heard Albertine
say: ‘Anyway, devoted or no, I hope very much not to meet him again,
because he led to us quarrelling. We mustn’t ever be angry again, the
two of us. It’s not nice’? Because she had seemed to feel desire for
Saint-Loup, I felt more or less cured for some time of the idea that she
loved women, which I imagined to be incompatible. And confronted by
Albertine’s rubber waterproof, in which she seemed to have become
another person, the indefatigable wanderer of rainy days, and which,
close-fitting, malleable and grey at that moment, seemed less to be to
protect her clothes against the water than to have been soaked by her
and to have been attached to my loved one’s body in order to take an
impression of her forms for a sculptor, I snatched at this tunic that
was jealously moulding a longed-for bosom, and drawing Albertine to me:

_Mais toi, ne veux-tu pas, voyageuse indolente,_

_Rêver sur mon épaule en y posant ton front?_³⁹

I said, taking her head in my hands and pointing to the great silent,
flooded meadows, stretching all the way in the gathering dusk to a
horizon closed off by the parallel ranges of distant, blue-coloured
foothills.

Two days later, on the famous Wednesday, on the same little railway I
had just taken in Balbec, to go and dine at La Raspelière, I was very
anxious not to miss Cottard in Graincourt-Saint-Vast, where a fresh
telephone-call from Mme Verdurin had told me I should find him. He was
to get on to my train and indicate where we needed to get off in order
to find the carriages that were sent from La Raspelière to the station.
And so, the little train stopping only for a moment at Graincourt, the
first station after Doncières, I had stationed myself at the door ahead
of time, so afraid was I of not seeing Cottard or of not being seen by
him. Fears that proved quite baseless! I had not appreciated the extent
to which, the little clan having shaped all the ‘regulars’ to the same
pattern, they, wearing full evening dress for good measure, were
instantly recognizable as they waited on the platform by a certain air
of self-assurance, elegance and familiarity, and by glances that passed,
as though over an empty space where there is nothing to stay the
attention, over the serried ranks of the common herd, watching for the
arrival of some regular who had caught the train at a preceding station,
and were already bubbling with the conversation to come. This sign of
election, with which the habit of dining together had stamped the
members of the little group, did not mark them out only when numbers of
them were massed there in force, forming a more brilliant patch of
colour in the midst of the flock of travellers – what Brichot called the
‘_pecus_’⁴⁰ – on whose lacklustre faces there could not be read any
notion relating to the Verdurins, any hope of ever dining at La
Raspelière. Moreover, these common travellers would have been less
interested than I was, had – despite the notoriety some had acquired –
they heard spoken the names of those faithful whom I was surprised to
find continuing to dine out, when several had already been doing so,
according to the accounts I had heard, before I was born, in an epoch
both sufficiently distant and sufficiently vague for me to be tempted to
exaggerate its remoteness. The contrast between their continuing, not
merely to exist but to be in the fullness of their vigour, and the
annihilation of so many friends whom I had already seen depart at one
time or another, produced in me the same feeling that we experience
when, in the ‘Late News’ column of the newspapers, we read the very
report we had least expected, that of a premature death, for example,
which seems fortuitous because the causes of which it is the outcome
were not known to us. The sense we get is that death does not come to
all men uniformly, but that a more advanced wave from its tragic tide,
as it rises, carries off an existence situated at the same level as
others that will yet long be spared by the waves that follow. We shall
see, moreover, later on, the diversity of the deaths which circulate
invisibly to be the source of that particular unexpectedness
represented, in newspapers, by the obituaries. Then I saw that, with
time, not only do real gifts, which may co-exist with the worst
vulgarities in conversation, reveal and impose themselves, but also that
second-rate individuals attain to those high positions that belong in
our childhood imaginings to a few celebrated old men, without reflecting
that a certain number of years later their disciples would be celebrated
also, having become masters, and inspire the same respect and fear which
they had felt in the old days. But if the names of the faithful were not
known to them, their appearance attracted the stares of the ‘_pecus_’.
Even in the train (once the accident of what one or other of them had
had to do during the day had brought them all together there), having
only one more isolated member to pick up at the next station, the
carriage in which they found themselves gathered, indicated by the elbow
of Ski, the sculptor, and bedecked with Cottard’s copy of _Le Temps_,
blossomed in the distance like a de luxe carriage and, at the station
appointed, rallied their laggard comrade. The only one whom these
promissory signs may have eluded, half blind as he was, was Brichot. But
one of the regulars had gladly taken on the duties of lookout on behalf
of the blind man and the moment they caught sight of his straw-hat, his
green umbrella and his blue spectacles, they steered him gently but
hurriedly towards the compartment of election. So that it was unheard-of
for one of the faithful, short of exciting the gravest suspicions of
being on the razzle, or even of not having come ‘by the train’, not to
meet up with the others along the way. On occasions, the opposite
occurred: one of the faithful had had to go some distance during the
afternoon and had in consequence to effect part of the journey on his
own before being joined by the group; but even in isolation like this,
alone of his kind, he did not fail most often to produce an effect. The
Future for which he was making singled him out to the person sitting on
the seat opposite, who said to himself, ‘He must be somebody’, and with
the obscure perspicacity of the travellers to Emmaus⁴¹ could discern,
whether around Cottard’s soft hat or Ski the sculptor, a vague halo, and
was only half surprised when, at the next station, a fashionable crowd,
if it was their final stop, welcomed this member of the faithful at the
carriage-door and went off with him towards one of the carriages that
were waiting, all bowed very low to by the Douville porter, or else, if
it were an intermediate station, invaded the compartment. Which is what,
precipitately, for several had arrived late, just as the train, already
in the station, was about to leave again, the troop did that Cottard led
at the double towards the carriage at whose window he had seen my
signals. Brichot, who was among the faithful in question, had become
more so in the course of the same years that had seen the assiduity of
others diminish. His progressively failing eyesight had obliged him,
even in Paris, to do less and less work in the evenings. Moreover, he
had little sympathy with the New Sorbonne, where German-style notions of
scientific accuracy were beginning to prevail over humanism.⁴² He
confined himself exclusively now to his lectures and to examination
juries; thus he had far more time to give to his social life, that is to
soirées at the Verdurins’, or those given now and again for the
Verdurins by one or other of the faithful, quaking with emotion. It is
true that on two occasions love had nearly achieved what his work could
not: detach Brichot from the little clan. But Mme Verdurin, who ‘kept a
weather eye open for squalls’ and, what was more, having acquired the
habit for the sake of her salon, had finally come to find a
disinterested pleasure in these kinds of drama and executions, had
turned him irremediably against the dangerous person, knowing, as she
put it, how to ‘keep everything shipshape’ and to ‘apply the cauterizing
iron to the wound’. This had been all the simpler for her in the case of
one of these dangerous persons as it was only Brichot’s washerwoman, and
Mme Verdurin, who had free access to the Professor’s fifth-floor rooms,
he blushing scarlet with pride whenever she deigned to undertake the
climb, had merely had to show this worthless woman the door. ‘What, the
Patronne had said to Brichot, a woman like me does you the honour of
coming up here, and you entertain a creature like that?’ Brichot had
never forgotten the service Mme Verdurin had rendered him by preventing
his old age from sinking into the mire, and had become increasingly
attached to her, whereas, in contrast to this renewal of affection and
perhaps on account of it, the Patronne had begun to feel dislike for one
of the faithful who was far too docile and of whose obedience she could
be certain in advance. But from his intimacy with the Verdurins Brichot
derived a prestige that marked him out among all his colleagues at the
Sorbonne. They were dazzled by the accounts he gave them of
dinner-parties to which they would never be invited, by the mention made
of him, in reviews, or by the portrait exhibited at the Salon, by one or
other renowned writer or painter, whose talents were held in high esteem
by the holders of the other chairs in the Faculty of Letters but whose
attention they had no chance of attracting, and finally by the very
elegance of dress of the worldly philosopher, an elegance that they had
mistaken at first for casualness until such time as their colleague
kindly explained to them that the top hat gladly allows itself to be put
down on the floor in the course of a visit, and is not worn for dinners
in the country, however smart, where it must be replaced by a soft hat,
which looks very well with a dinner-jacket. During the first moments of
the little group’s being engulfed by the carriage, I was not even able
to speak to Cottard, for he was choking, less from having run so as not
to miss the train, as from amazement at having cut it so fine. More than
joy at a triumph, he was experiencing the hilarity almost of a merry
prank. ‘Oh, that was a good one! he said, once he had recovered himself.
Another few seconds, upon my word, that’s what they call arriving on the
dot!’ he added with a wink, not in order to ask whether the expression
was correct, for these days he oozed self-assurance, but out of
self-satisfaction. Finally he was able to name me to the other members
of the little clan. I was annoyed to see that they were almost all of
them dressed in what in Paris is called a _smoking_. I had forgotten
that the Verdurins had begun timidly to evolve in the direction of
society, an evolution slowed by the Dreyfus Affair, but accelerated by
the ‘new’ music, if one which they themselves denied, and would continue
to deny until it had come to fruition, like those military objectives
which a general announces only once he has attained them, in such a way
as not to appear to have suffered a defeat if he fails. For its part,
moreover, the world was quite prepared to move towards them. As yet, it
looked on them as people to whom no one from society went, but who did
not thereby feel any regret. The Verdurin salon passed for a temple of
music. It was there, you were assured, that Vinteuil had found
inspiration and encouragement. Now, if Vinteuil’s sonata remained wholly
misunderstood and more or less unknown, his name, spoken as that of the
greatest of contemporary musicians, exerted an extraordinary prestige.
Indeed, certain young men from the Faubourg having made up their minds
to be as well-informed as the bourgeoisie, three of their number had
learned music and among these Vinteuil’s sonata enjoyed a huge
reputation. Having returned home, they spoke of it to the intelligent
mother who had urged them on to cultivate themselves. And having taken
an interest in their sons’ studies, at concerts the mothers would gaze
with a certain respect at Mme Verdurin, who was following the score from
her front box. Up until now, this latent society-mindedness on the
Verdurins’ part had betrayed itself by two actions only. On the one
hand, Mme Verdurin had said of the Princesse de Caprarola,⁴³ ‘Ah, she’s
intelligent, that one, she’s an agreeable woman. What I can’t stand are
the imbeciles, the people who bore me, they drive me crazy.’ Which would
have given anyone in the least discerning to think that the Princesse de
Caprarola, a woman of the very highest society, had paid a call on Mme
Verdurin. She had even uttered her name in the course of a visit of
condolences she had made to Mme Swann after the death of the latter’s
husband, and had asked her whether she knew them. ‘How did you say?
Odette had replied, suddenly looking sad. – Verdurin. – Oh, then I know!
she went on, desolately, I don’t know them, or rather I know of them
without having met them, they’re people I saw once at some friends’ a
long time ago, they’re agreeable.’ The Princesse de Caprarola having
left, Odette would very much have liked simply to have told the truth.
But her instant falsehood was not the product of calculation, but the
revelation of her fears and of her desires. She had denied not what it
would have been astute to deny, but what she would have wished was not
the case, even if her interlocutor was to learn within the hour that it
was indeed the case. Not long afterwards she had regained her
self-confidence and had even pre-empted questions by saying, so as not
to appear to fear them: ‘Mme Verdurin, why, I knew her terrifically
well,’ with an affectation of humility, like a great lady recounting how
she has taken the tram. ‘The Verdurins have been much spoken of just
lately,’ said Mme de Souvré. Odette, with the disdainful smile of a
duchess, replied: ‘Oh yes, indeed, I fancy they’re much spoken of. From
time to time you get new people like that who arrive in society,’
without reflecting that she herself was one of the newest. ‘The
Princesse de Caprarola has dined there, Mme de Souvré went on. – Ah!
replied Odette, accentuating her smile, that doesn’t surprise me. It’s
always through the Princesse de Caprarola that these things start, then
another one comes along, the Comtesse Molé, for example.’ In saying
this, Odette appeared to have a profound disdain for the two great
ladies who were in the habit of being the earliest occupants of the
newly opened salons. You sensed by her tone that this meant that they
would never manage to get her, Odette, like Mme de Souvré, aboard any
such ship of fools as that.

Following Mme Verdurin’s admission as to the Princesse de Caprarola’s
intelligence, the second sign that the Verdurins were conscious of their
future destiny was that they hoped very much that (without having
requested it formally, of course) people should now wear evening dress
when coming to dinner; M. Verdurin might now have been greeted without
shame by his nephew, the one who was ‘in queer street’.

Among those who got into my carriage at Graincourt was Saniette, who had
been driven out from the Verdurins’ in the old days by his cousin
Forcheville, but had returned. His defects, where his social life was
concerned, had once been – for all his superior qualities – somewhat of
the same kind as those of Cottard, shyness, a desire to please, and
fruitless attempts to manage to do so. But if life had led Cottard to
wear, if not at the Verdurins’, where he had, thanks to the influence
that past times exert over us when we find ourselves in an accustomed
setting, remained much the same, then at least among his patients, when
on duty at the hospital or at the Academy of Medicine, an exterior of
coldness, disdain and solemnity that was accentuated while he was coming
out with his puns in front of his indulgent pupils, and had dug a
veritable chasm between the present Cottard and the old one, the same
defects had on the contrary become exaggerated in Saniette, even as he
sought to correct them. Sensing that he was often boring, that he was
not listened to, instead of then slowing down as Cottard would have
done, and compelling their attention by an air of authority, not only
did he attempt, by a playful tone, to apologize for the too serious turn
of his conversation, but he hurried his delivery, ignored all but the
gist, used abbreviations so as to seem less long-winded and more
familiar with the things he was talking about and, by rendering these
unintelligible, merely succeeded in seeming interminable. His
self-assurance was not like that of Cottard, which caused his patients
to freeze, who, to the people who acclaimed his amenableness in company,
would answer: ‘He’s not the same man any more when he receives you in
his consulting-room, you in the light, he with his back to it, with
those piercing eyes.’ It did not impose itself, you felt it was masking
too much self-consciousness, that the least thing would be enough to put
it to flight. Saniette, whose friends had always told him he had too
little belief in himself, and who indeed saw people whom he rightly
regarded as very inferior obtaining with ease the successes that were
denied to him, could no longer start on a story without smiling at its
drollery, for fear that a serious expression might sell his wares short.
At times, lending credence to the humour he himself appeared to find in
what he was about to say, they granted him the favour of a general
silence. But the story would fall flat. A kind-hearted guest would
sometimes slip Saniette the private, almost secret encouragement of a
smile of approval, conveying it to him furtively, without attracting
attention, as someone slips you a note. But no one went so far as to
assume the responsibility, to risk the public adherence, of laughing out
loud. Long after the story had finished, and fallen flat, the dejected
Saniette alone remained smiling to himself, as if enjoying, alone, the
delectation in it that he pretended to find sufficient and which the
others had not felt. As for the sculptor Ski, so called because of the
difficulty they found in pronouncing his Polish name, and because he
himself, since he had been living in a certain society, had affected not
to wish to be confused with relations who were very well placed but
somewhat boring and very numerous, he, aged forty-five and extremely
ugly, had a sort of impishness, of dreamy whimsicality, that he had
preserved from having been, up until the age often, the most ravishing
child prodigy in the world, the apple of every lady’s eye. Mme Verdurin
claimed he was more artistic than Elstir. Any resemblance he bore to the
latter was purely external, however. It was sufficient for Elstir, who
had met Ski on one occasion, to feel for him that profound repulsion
that is inspired in us, even more than by those people who are our
complete opposites, by those who resemble us only on our worst side, in
whom are displayed what is least good about us, the faults which we have
cured, unfortunate reminders to us of how we may have appeared to some
before we became what we are. But Mme Verdurin believed that Ski had
more temperament than Elstir because there was no art for which he did
not have an aptitude, and she was convinced that he might have developed
that aptitude into a talent had he had less laziness. This last even
seemed to the Patronne to be one more gift, being the opposite of hard
work, which she thought was the lot of those without genius. Ski would
paint anything you wished, on cuff links or on the tops of doors. He
sang with the voice of a composer, and played from memory, giving an
imitation of an orchestra at the piano, less by his virtuosity than by
the false bass notes that signified his fingers’ inability to indicate
that at this point there was a cornet, which he imitated in any case
with his mouth. Searching for words as he spoke, to make people believe
in an interesting impression, in the same way as he would hold back a
chord and then strike it, saying ‘ping’, to make the brass section
sound, he passed for being wonderfully intelligent, but in point of fact
his ideas amounted to two or three, very limited ones. Annoyed by his
reputation as a fantasist, he had taken it into his head to demonstrate
that he was a practical, positive person, whence a triumphant
affectation in him of false precision and false good sense, made worse
by the fact that he had no memory and that his information was always
inaccurate. The movements of his head, his neck and his legs might have
been graceful had he still been nine years old, with blond curls, a big
lace collar and little red leather boots. Having arrived ahead of time
with Cottard and Brichot at the station in Graincourt, they had left
Brichot in the waiting-room and gone to take a stroll. When Cottard had
wanted to go back, Ski had replied: ‘But there’s no rush. It’s not the
local train today, but the departmental train.’ Overjoyed at observing
the effect that this pedantic nuance produced in Cottard, he added,
speaking of himself: ‘Yes, because Ski loves the arts, because he models
in clay, people think he isn’t practical. Nobody knows this line better
than I.’ Nevertheless, they were on their way back to the station, when
suddenly, catching sight of the smoke of the little train as it arrived,
Cottard let out a cry and shouted: ‘We’ll have to run like the very
devil.’ They had in fact arrived just in time, the distinction between
the local and the departmental trains having ever existed only in Ski’s
head. ‘But isn’t the Princesse on the train?’ asked Brichot in a
quavering voice, whose enormous spectacles, resplendent like the
reflectors that laryngologists attach to their foreheads to shine down
their patients’ throats, seemed to have borrowed their vitality from the
professor’s eyes and, perhaps because of the effort he was making to
adjust his vision to them, seemed, even at the most insignificant
moments, to be themselves gazing with a sustained attention and an
extraordinary fixity. Moreover, by gradually depriving Brichot of his
sight, his illness had revealed to him the beauties of this sense, just
as we often need to have decided to part with an object, by making a
present of it for example, to look at it, to miss it and to admire it.
‘No, no, the Princesse has gone to take some of Mme Verdurin’s guests
back to Maineville, who were catching the Paris train. It’s not
impossible even that Mme Verdurin, who had things to do in Saint-Mars,
went with her! In that case she’d be travelling with us and we’d all be
doing the journey together, it’d be delightful. The thing is to keep an
eye open at Maineville, and the right one! Ah well, never mind, we very
nearly missed the boat and no mistake. When I saw the train, I was
thunderstruck. That’s what they call arriving at the psychological
moment. If we’d missed the train, you know, if Mme Verdurin saw the
carriages coming back without us, picture the scene! added the doctor,
who was not yet recovered from his agitation. That was no ordinary
escapade. I say, Brichot, what d’you think of our little adventure?
asked the Doctor with a certain pride. – My word, replied Brichot, yes
indeed, if you hadn’t found the train still there, as the late
Villemain⁴⁴ would have said, that would have put the lid on things!’ But
I, distracted from the very start by these people whom I did not know, I
recalled all of a sudden what Cottard had said to me in the ballroom of
the little casino, and as if an invisible chain had managed to connect
an organ to the pictures in my memory, that of Albertine leaning her
breasts against those of Andrée gave me a terrible pain in my heart. The
pain did not last; the idea of Albertine’s possible relations with women
no longer seemed possible since two days earlier, when the advances my
friend had made to Saint-Loup had excited a new jealousy in me which had
caused me to forget the earlier one. I had the innocence of those people
who believe that one taste necessarily excludes another. At
Arembouville, as the tram was crowded, a farmer in a blue smock, who had
only a third-class ticket, got into our compartment. The Doctor,
adjudging that the Princesse could not be allowed to travel with him,
summoned a porter, displayed his card as doctor to one of the great
railway companies, and forced the station-master to make the farmer get
out. This scene so pained the kind heart and alarmed the timidity of
Saniette that the moment he saw it start, fearful already, because of
the number of country people there were on the platform, that it might
take on the dimensions of a peasants’ revolt, he feigned a stomach-ache
and, in order not to be accused of having some share in the Doctor’s
violence, he slipped into the corridor on the pretence of looking for
what Cottard called the ‘W C’. Not finding one, he gazed at the
countryside from the other end of the ‘slowcoach’. ‘If this is your
first time at Mme Verdurin’s, Monsieur, Brichot said to me, anxious to
show off his talents to a “newcomer”, you’ll find there’s no circle
where you get a stronger sense of “_douceur de vivre_”, in the words of
the inventors of dilettantism, of couldn’t-care-less-ism, of a lot of
words in “ism” fashionable among our jumped-up shop-girls, I refer to M.
le Prince de Talleyrand.’⁴⁵ For when he spoke of these great noblemen
from the past, he thought it was witty and lent ‘period colour’ to put
Monsieur in front of their title, and would say Monsieur le Duc de La
Rochefoucauld, or Monsieur le Cardinal de Retz, whom he also called from
time to time ‘That “_struggle-for-lifer_” de Gondi, that “_boulangiste_”
de Marcillac.’⁴⁶ And he never failed to call Montesquieu, with a smile,
‘Monsieur le Président Secondat de Montesquieu.’ A clever man of the
world would have been irritated by this pedantry, which smelt of the
schools. But there is pedantry, too, in the perfect manners of the man
of the world, revealing of another caste, that in which, when speaking
of a prince, they put ‘the Emperor’ in front of the name of William,⁴⁷
and talk to a Royal Highness in the third person. ‘Ah, to him we must
take off our hats, Brichot went on, alluding to “Monsieur le Prince de
Talleyrand”. He’s an ancestor. – It’s a delightful circle, Cottard said
to me, you’ll find a bit of everything, for Mme Verdurin is not
exclusive: illustrious scholars like Brichot, the high nobility like,
for example, the Princesse Sherbatoff, a great Russian lady, a friend of
the Grand-Duchesse Eudoxie, who even visits her alone, at the times when
no one is admitted.’ The Grand-Duchesse Eudoxie indeed, not caring that
the Princesse Sherbatoff, who had not been received by anyone for a long
time past, should come to her when she might have people there, only let
her come very early in the day, when Her Highness had none of the
friends with her for whom it would have been as disagreeable to
encounter the Princesse as it would have been embarrassing for the
latter. As, for the last three years, immediately after leaving, like a
manicurist, the Grand-Duchesse, Mme Sherbatoff had gone off to Mme
Verdurin’s, who had only just woken up, and did not leave her again, it
could be said that the Princesse’s loyalty infinitely exceeded that of
Brichot even, assiduous though he was at the Wednesdays, where he had
the pleasure of believing himself, in Paris, to be a sort of
Chateaubriand at l’Abbaye-aux-Bois⁴⁸ and where, in the country, he got
the impression of having become the equivalent of what the man whom he
always called (with the mischievous satisfaction of the literary man)
‘M. de Voltaire’ may have been for Mme de Châtelet.⁴⁹

The absence of connections had enabled the Princesse Sherbatoff to
display a fidelity to the Verdurins in recent years that made her more
than an ordinary member of the ‘faithful’, but the very type, the ideal
that Mme Verdurin had long believed was inaccessible and which, having
reached the change of life, she had at last found made flesh in this new
female recruit. However much the Patronne might be racked by jealousy,
it was unprecedented for even the most assiduous of the faithful not to
have ‘defaulted’ once. The most stay-at-home had let themselves be
tempted by a journey; the most continent had had an amorous adventure;
the most robust may have caught ’flu, the idlest been trapped by their
twenty-eight days, the most indifferent gone to close the eyes of their
dying mother. And it was in vain that Mme Verdurin would then say to
them, like the Roman empress,⁵⁰ that she was the one general whom her
legion must obey, like Christ or the Kaiser,⁵¹ that whoever loved his
father and mother as much as her but was not prepared to leave them in
order to follow her, was unworthy of her, that instead of growing weak
in bed or letting themselves be made a fool of by a whore, they would do
better to remain close to her, she, their one remedy and their one
delight. But destiny, which is sometimes pleased to embellish the
conclusion of lives that are long-drawn-out, had caused Mme Verdurin to
meet the Princesse Sherbatoff. Having quarrelled with her family, an
exile from her homeland, no longer knowing anyone except the Baronne
Putbus and the Grande-Duchesse Eudoxie, to whom, because she had no wish
to meet the women friends of the first, and because the second had no
wish for her women friends to meet the Princesse, she went only at those
morning hours when Mme Verdurin was still asleep, not recalling having
kept to her room on a single occasion since the age of twelve, when she
had had measles, and having replied on the 31st of December to Mme
Verdurin who, concerned at being on her own, had asked her without
warning whether she could not stay overnight, despite New Year’s Day:
‘But what would be able to stop me, no matter what day it is? Moreover,
that’s a day when we remain _en famille_ and you are my family’, living
in a _pension_ and swapping whenever the Verdurins moved house,
following them on their holidays in the country, the Princesse was, for
Mme Verdurin, so much the embodiment of Vigny’s line:

_Toi seule me parus ce qu ’on cherche toujours_⁵²

that the lady president of the little club, desirous of securing one of
the ‘faithful’ even unto death, had asked her that whichever of them was
the last to die should have herself buried next to the other. Before
strangers – among whom must always be counted that stranger to whom we
lie the most because it is by them that it would be most painful to be
despised: ourselves – the Princesse Sherbatoff took care to represent
her only three friendships – with the Grande-Duchesse, with the
Verdurins and with Mme Putbus – as the only ones, not that cataclysms
independent of her will had allowed to emerge amidst the destruction of
all the rest, but which a free choice had caused her to elect in
preference to any other, and to which a certain liking for solitude and
simplicity had led her to confine herself. ‘I see _no one_ else,’ she
would say, stressing the inflexible character of what had the appearance
more of a self-imposed rule than a necessity to be endured. She would
add: ‘I frequent only three houses’, like those authors who, afraid of
being unable to stretch to a fourth, announce that their play will have
only three performances. Whether or not M. and Mme Verdurin lent
credence to this figment, they had helped the Princesse to instil it
into the minds of the faithful. And the latter were persuaded both that
the Princesse, out of the thousands of connections available to her, had
chosen the Verdurins alone, and that the Verdurins, solicited in vain by
the whole of the upper aristocracy, had consented to make only one
exception, in favour of the Princesse.

As they saw it, the Princesse, too superior to her original milieu not
to be bored there, and out of all the people with whom she might have
associated, had found the Verdurins alone to be agreeable, and the
latter in return, deaf to the overtures of the whole aristocracy that
had been offering itself to them, had consented to make only one
exception, in favour of a great lady more intelligent than her peers,
the Princesse Sherbatoff.

The Princesse was very rich; at every first night she had a large
ground-floor box, to which, authorized by Mme Verdurin, she took the
faithful and never anyone else. People would point out this pale,
enigmatic figure who had aged without turning white, but rather had gone
red, like certain long-lasting, shrivelled fruit in the hedgerows. They
admired both her influence and her humility, for though always having
with her an Academician, Brichot, a celebrated scholar, Cottard, the
leading pianist of the day, and later on M. de Charlus, she still did
her best to book the gloomiest _baignoire_, and remained at the back,
paying no attention to the auditorium but living exclusively for the
little group, who, a little before the end of the performance, would
withdraw, in the train of this strange sovereign, who was not without
possessing a shy, fascinating, worn-out beauty. But, if Mme Sherbatoff
did not look at the auditorium, and remained in the shadows, it was in
order to try to forget that there existed a living world that she
desired passionately, but was unable to get to know; the ‘coterie’ in a
_baignoire_ was for her what their almost corpse-like stillness is for
certain animals in the presence of danger. Nonetheless, the taste for
novelty and for curiosity which exercises society people meant that they
perhaps lent greater attention to this mysterious stranger than to the
celebrities in the front boxes on whom everyone came calling. They
imagined her to be other than the people whom they knew, that a
wonderful intelligence, allied to a clairvoyant goodness, had retained
this small circle of the eminent around her. Were someone’s name to be
mentioned, or someone introduced to her, the Princesse was forced to
feign a great indifference so as to keep up the fiction of her horror of
society. Nonetheless, with the support of Cottard or of Mme Verdurin, a
few newcomers succeeded in meeting her, and her euphoria at meeting one
of them was such that she forgot the fable of her voluntary isolation
and lavished attention on this new arrival. If he were a nonentity,
everyone was astonished. ‘What a peculiar thing, that the Princesse, who
refuses to meet anybody, should go and make an exception for someone so
out of keeping!’ But these fertilizing acquaintances were rare, and the
Princesse lived strictly confined in the midst of the faithful.

Cottard was far more inclined to say, ‘I’ll see him on Wednesday at the
Verdurins,’ than ‘I’ll see him on Tuesday at the Academy.’ He spoke also
of the Wednesdays as of an occupation just as important and just as
ineluctable. Cottard, moreover, was one of these little-sought-after
people who make it an imperious duty to accept an invitation as though
it constituted an order, like a military or judicial summons. He needed
to be called out on a truly important visit for him to ‘default’ from
the Verdurins on a Wednesday, its importance having more to do,
moreover, with the status of the sick person than the seriousness of
their condition. For Cottard, kindly man though he was, would renounce
the comforts of a Wednesday, not for a workman who had had a stroke, but
for the head-cold of a minister. Even in this last instance he would say
to his wife: ‘Make my sincere apologies to Mme Verdurin. Warn her I’ll
be late getting there. His Excellency might well have picked another day
to catch cold.’ One Wednesday, their elderly cook having cut the vein in
her arm, Cottard, already in a dinner-jacket in order to go to the
Verdurins, had given a shrug when his wife timidly asked him whether he
could not dress the wound: ‘But I can’t, Léontine, he had exclaimed with
a groan, you can see I’ve got my white waistcoat on.’ So as not to
provoke her husband, Mme Cottard had sent post-haste for the _chef de
clinique_. The latter, in order to save time, had taken a cab, with the
result that, his carriage entering the courtyard at the same moment as
that of Cottard was about to leave to take him to the Verdurins, they
had wasted five minutes advancing and retreating. Mme Cottard was
embarrassed that the _chef de clinique_ should have seen her lord and
master in his evening clothes. Cottard had cursed at the delay, perhaps
out of remorse, and left in an execrable temper that it required all the
pleasures of a Wednesday finally to dispel.

Were a patient to ask Cottard: ‘Do you sometimes come across the
Guermantes?’ it was in the best of good faith that the Professor would
reply: ‘Perhaps not the Guermantes exactly, I don’t know. But I meet all
those sorts of people at some friends of mine. You’ve certainly heard
speak of the Verdurins. They know everybody. And they at least aren’t
smart folk who’ve gone down in the world. There’s money there all right.
Mme Verdurin’s generally reckoned to have thirty-five million. I mean,
that’s a tidy sum, thirty-five million. So she doesn’t do things by
halves. You mentioned the Duchesse de Guermantes. I’m going to tell you
the difference. Mme Verdurin is a great lady, the Duchesse de Guermantes
is probably on her uppers. You get the distinction, don’t you? In any
event, whether the Guermantes go to Mme Verdurin’s or not, she
entertains, which is better, the d’Sherbatoffs, the d’Forchevilles, _e
tutti quanti_, people out of the very top drawer, all the nobility of
France and Navarre, who you’d see me talking to as equals. What’s more,
those sorts of individuals are happy to seek out the princes of
science,’ he added, with a beatifically self-regarding smile, produced
on his lips by the presumptuous satisfaction, not so much that an
expression once reserved for such as Potain and Charcot⁵³ should now be
applied to him, but that he was finally able to make suitable use of all
those expressions authorized by custom of which, after much burning of
the midnight oil, he now had a thorough command. And so, after citing
the Princesse Sherbatoff to me among the people received by Mme
Verdurin, Cottard added, with a wink: ‘You can tell the type of
establishment it is, you understand what I mean?’ He meant the most chic
imaginable. Now, to entertain a Russian lady who knew only the
Grande-Duchesse Eudoxie meant little. But the Princesse Sherbatoff might
even not have known her without lessening the opinion Cottard held as to
the supreme elegance of the Verdurin salon or his delight at being
received there. The splendour in which the people with whom we associate
appear clothed is no more intrinsic than that of those characters on the
stage to dress whom it is quite pointless for a director to spend
hundreds of thousands of francs on buying authentic costumes and real
jewelry that will have no effect, when a great designer will create an
impression of luxury a thousand times more sumptuous by directing a beam
of artificial light at a doublet of coarse cloth strewn with glass
bottle-tops and a cloak made of paper. A man may have spent his life
amidst the great ones of the earth, who to him were either tedious
relatives or tiresome acquaintances, because in his eyes a habit
contracted from the cradle had stripped them of all glamour. But in
return, this same glamour needed only, by some accident, to be added to
the most obscure individuals for Cottards without number to live
bedazzled by titled women whose salons they imagined to be the centre of
aristocratic elegance, and who were not even what Mme de Villeparisis
and her friends were (great ladies fallen from favour with whom the
aristocracy that had been brought up with them no longer associated);
no, were the many people who took pride in their friendship with such
ladies to publish their memoirs, citing their names and those of the
women whom they received, no one, Mme de Cambremer any more than Mme de
Guermantes, would be able to identify them. But what matter! In this
way, a Cottard has his Baronne or his Marquise, who for him is ‘the
Baronne’ or ‘the Marquise’, just as in Marivaux, where the Baronne’s
name is never spoken and we have no idea even that she ever had one.⁵⁴
Cottard believes all the more strongly that he has here found the very
essence of the aristocracy – which has no knowledge of this lady –
because the more doubtful the titles the more space the coronets occupy
on the glasses, the silver, the notepaper and the luggage. Numerous
Cottards, who thought they were spending their lives in the heart of the
Faubourg Saint-Germain, have had their imaginations more bewitched
perhaps by feudal dreams than those who have lived among princes in
actuality, just as, for the small shopkeeper who, on Sundays, goes now
and again to visit ‘olde world’ buildings, it is sometimes from those
buildings all of whose stones are of our own world, and whose ceilings
have been painted blue and strewn with gold stars by pupils of
Viollet-le-Duc,⁵⁵ that they get the strongest sense of the Middle Ages.
‘The Princesse will be at Maineville. She will travel with us. But I
shan’t introduce you straight away. It’d be better were Mme Verdurin to
do that. Unless I find some neat way in. You can rely on me then, I
shall jump at it. – What were you talking about? said Saniette, who made
as if he had been out getting a breath of air. – I was quoting to
Monsieur, said Brichot, a remark you know well, of the man who in my
opinion is first among all the “_fins de siècle_” (of the eighteenth
_siècle_, be it understood), first name Charles-Maurice, _abbé_ of
Périgord.⁵⁶ He had begun by promising to be a very good journalist. But
he went to the bad, I mean he became a minister! These falls from grace
happen in life. A none too scrupulous politician what’s more, with all
the disdain of a thoroughbred nobleman, but who found no difficulty in
working in his time for nothing, let’s not hide the fact, and died an
incorrigible member of the centre-left.’

At Saint-Pierre-des-Ifs there got in a splendid girl who, alas, was not
part of the little group. I could not take my eyes off her magnolia
flesh, her black eyes, the high and admirable construction of her
breasts. After a moment, she wanted to open a window because it was
rather hot in the compartment, and not wanting to ask everyone for
permission, since I alone had no overcoat, she said to me, in a quick,
fresh, laughing tone: ‘You don’t find it disagreeable, Monsieur, the
fresh air?’ I would have liked to say to her: ‘Come with us to the
Verdurins,’ or ‘Tell me your name and address.’ I replied: ‘No, the
fresh air doesn’t worry me, Mademoiselle.’ And afterwards, without
moving from her seat: ‘The smoke won’t worry your friends?’, and she lit
a cigarette. At the third station she jumped out. The next day, I asked
Albertine who it could have been. For, foolishly, believing that we can
love only one thing, and jealous of Albertine’s attitude in respect of
Robert, I felt reassured where women were concerned. Albertine told me,
perfectly sincerely I believe, that she did not know. ‘I’d so much like
to meet her again! I exclaimed. – Don’t worry, we always do meet again,’
answered Albertine. In this particular instance, she was wrong; I have
never again met nor identified the beautiful girl with the cigarette. We
shall see, moreover, why for a long time I had to leave off searching
for her. But I have not forgotten her. It often happens that when I am
thinking of her I am seized by a wild longing. But these recurrences of
desire force us to reflect that, if we wanted to meet these girls again
with the same pleasure, we should have also to go back to the year in
question, which has since been followed by ten others, in the course of
which the girl has faded. We can sometimes find a person again, but not
abolish time. All this up until that unforeseen day, sad as a winter’s
night, when we are no longer seeking that particular girl, nor any
other, and when to find one would alarm us even. For we no longer feel
we have sufficient attractions to please, nor the strength to love. Not,
of course, that we are, in the true sense of the word, impotent. So far
as love is concerned, we would love more than ever. But we feel that it
is too great an undertaking for the little strength that we preserve.
Our eternal rest has already introduced intervals, in which we cannot go
out, cannot speak. To place a foot on the step that is needed is a
triumph, like not missing a somersault. To be seen in this state by a
girl whom we love, even if we have kept the face and the fair hair we
had as a young man! We can no longer assume the fatigue of falling into
step with youth. So much the worse if the desires of the flesh are
redoubled instead of being deadened! On their account, we send for a
woman whom we shall make no effort to please, who will share our couch
for one evening only and whom we shall never see again.

‘We must still be without news of the violinist,’ said Cottard. The
event of the day amongst the little clan had indeed been the defection
of Mme Verdurin’s favoured violinist. He, who was doing his military
service near Doncières, came three times a week to dine at La Raspelière
since he had leave up until midnight. But two days before, for the first
time, the faithful had not managed to discover him on the tram. It was
assumed he had missed it. But for all that Mme Verdurin had sent to the
tram following, and finally to the last one, the carriage had come back
empty. ‘He’s been put on jankers for sure, there’s no other explanation
for his flight. In the soldiering trade, you know, with those strapping
young fellows, it only takes a grumpy N C O. – It’ll be all the more
mortifying for Mme Verdurin, said Brichot, if he lets her down again
this evening, because our charming hostess is entertaining to dinner for
the very first time the neighbours who have let La Raspelière to her,
the Marquis and Marquise de Cambremer. – This evening, the Marquis and
Marquise de Cambremer! exclaimed Cottard. But I had absolutely no idea.
Of course, I knew as you all did that they were due to come one day, but
I didn’t know it’d be so soon. _Sapristi_, he said, turning to me, what
did I tell you? The Princesse Sherbatoff, the Marquis and Marquise de
Cambremer.’ And having repeated these names, savouring their
melodiousness: ‘You can see that we do well for ourselves, he said.
Never mind, for your first time, you’ve scored a bull’s-eye. It’s going
to be an exceptionally brilliant roomful.’ And, turning to Brichot, he
added: ‘The Patronne must be furious. It was high time we arrived to
lend her a hand.’ Since Mme Verdurin had been at La Raspelière, she had
indeed affected in front of the faithful to be under an obligation and
in despair at having to invite the owners. In this way she would get
better terms for the following year, she said, and was doing it only out
of self-interest. But she claimed to feel such terror, to fuss so about
nothing more than a dinner with people not from the little group, that
she was always putting it off. It did frighten her a little as it
happens, for the reasons that she proclaimed, even though she
exaggerated them, if from another point of view it charmed her, for
snobbish reasons about which she preferred to remain silent. She was
thus half sincere, she thought the little clan something so unique in
the world, one of those bodies such that it would take centuries to
constitute its like, that she trembled at the thought of seeing
introduced into it these provincials, unfamiliar with the _Tetralogy_
and the _Meistersinger_, who would not know how to sustain their part in
the concert of the general conversation and were capable, by coming to
Mme Verdurin’s, of ruining one of the famous Wednesdays, those fragile
and incomparable masterpieces, like the Venetian glass that one false
note is enough to shatter. ‘What’s more, they’re bound to be as _anti_
as can be, and all top brass, M. Verdurin had said. – Oh _that_, that’s
all one to me, that particular story’s been being talked about for quite
some time,’ Mme Verdurin had replied, who was genuinely pro-Dreyfus but
would still have liked to earn some worldly reward from the preponderant
Dreyfusism of her salon. But Dreyfusism had triumphed politically, not
socially. For society people, Labori, Reinach, Picquart and Zola
remained traitors of a kind that could only alienate them from the
little nucleus. And so, after this incursion into politics, Mme Verdurin
was anxious to get back into art. Were d’Indy and Debussy not anyway ‘in
the wrong’ over the Affair?⁵⁷ ‘So far as the Affair is concerned, we’d
only need to sit them next to Brichot, she said (the university man
being the only one of the faithful who had taken the side of the General
Staff, which had lowered him greatly in Mme Verdurin’s esteem). We’re
not obliged to go on everlastingly about the Dreyfus Affair. No, the
truth is that the Cambremers get on my nerves.’ As for the faithful, as
much excited by the unconfessed desire they felt to meet the Cambremers
as taken in by the annoyance Mme Verdurin affected to feel at
entertaining them, they daily took up again when talking with her the
unworthy arguments she had herself used in favour of the invitation and
attempted to make them irresistible. ‘Make up your mind to it once and
for all, repeated Cottard, and they’ll knock something off the rent,
they’ll pay the gardener, you’ll have the use of the field. All that’s
well worth an evening of boredom. I mention it only for your sake,’ he
added, although his heart had beaten faster one time when, in Mme
Verdurin’s carriage, he had met that of the old Mme de Cambremer along
the road, and above all had been made to feel small in front of the
porters when, at the station, he found himself next to the Marquis. For
their part, the Cambremers, who lived much too far outside the social
swim to be able even to suspect that certain fashionable women might
speak of Mme Verdurin with a certain consideration, imagined the latter
to be someone who could know only bohemians, was not even lawfully
married perhaps, and, so far as people ‘of birth’ were concerned, would
only ever meet themselves. They had resigned themselves to dining there
only in order to keep in with a tenant who they hoped would return for
many more seasons, especially since they had learned, the previous
month, that she had just inherited all those millions. It was in silence
and without any tasteless jokes that they prepared themselves for the
fateful day. The faithful no longer expected it ever to arrive, so many
times had Mme Verdurin already fixed in their presence a date that was
forever shifting. These false resolutions had as their aim, not only to
make display of the nuisance this dinner-party was causing her, but to
keep in suspense those members of the little group who lived in the
vicinity and were inclined at times to default. Not that the Patronne
had guessed that the ‘great day’ was as agreeable for them as for her,
but because, having persuaded them that for her this dinner-party was
the most terrible drudgery, she could appeal to their devotion. ‘You’re
not going to leave me on my own, hobnobbing with that lot! On the
contrary, we need to be there in numbers to put up with the boredom. Of
course we shan’t be able to talk about anything that interests us. As a
Wednesday it’ll be a failure, but there you are!’

‘In fact,’ replied Brichot, addressing himself to me, ‘I don’t believe
Mme Verdurin, who is highly intelligent and very fastidious in working
out her Wednesdays, was very keen to entertain these squireens _of_ high
pedigree but no brains. She couldn’t bring herself to invite the dowager
Marquise but has resigned herself to the son and daughter-in-law. – Ah,
we shall be seeing the Marquise de Cambremer?’ said Cottard, with a
smile that he thought he should make both suggestive and bantering,
although he did not know whether Mme de Cambremer was pretty or not. But
the title of Marquise had evoked dashing and glamorous images in him.
‘Oh, I know her,’ said Ski, who had met her once when out driving with
Mme Verdurin. ‘You don’t know her in the biblical sense?’ said the
Doctor, one of whose favourite jokes this was, sliding a louche glance
beneath his eye-glass. ‘She’s intelligent, Ski said to me. Of course,’
he went on, noticing that I had said nothing and smilingly laying weight
on every word: ‘she’s intelligent yet she isn’t, she lacks education,
she’s frivolous, but she has an instinct for pretty things. She’ll fall
silent but she’ll never say anything stupid. Besides, her colouring is
pretty. Hers is a portrait it’d be amusing to paint,’ he added, half
closing his eyes, as if he were gazing at her posing in front of him.
Since I thought the complete opposite of what Ski had expressed with so
many qualifications, I contented myself with saying that she was the
sister of a very distinguished engineer, M. Legrandin. ‘Well, you see,
you’ll be introduced to a pretty woman, Brichot said to me, and one
never knows what that may lead to. Cleopatra wasn’t even a great lady,
she was the little woman, the thoughtless and terrible little woman of
our Meilhac,⁵⁸ and think of the consequences, not only for that
simpleton of an Antony but for the Ancient World. – I’ve already been
introduced to Mme de Cambremer, I answered. – Ah, so you’re going to
find yourself in familiar country. – I’ll be all the more glad to see
her, I replied, because she promised me a book by the former _curé_ of
Combray about the local place names, and I’ll be able to remind her of
her promise. I’m interested in the priest and in etymologies also. –
Don’t put too much trust in those he gives, replied Brichot. The book,
which is at La Raspelière and which I’ve amused myself by looking
through, tells me nothing of any value; it’s littered with errors. I’ll
give you an example. The word _bricq_ enters into the formation of a
number of place-names hereabouts. The good cleric has had the somewhat
cranky notion that it comes from _briga_, a height or fortified place.
He finds it already in the Celtic tribes, Latobriges, Nemetobriges and
so on, and traces it even in names like Briand, Brion, etc. To come back
to the region we have the pleasure of traversing with you at this
moment, Bricquebosc would signify the wood of the height, Bricqueville
the habitation of the height, Bricquebec, where we shall be stopping in
a moment before getting to Maineville, the height near the stream. Yet
that’s not it at all, for the good reason that _bricq_ is the old Norse
word signifying quite simply a bridge. Just as _fleur_, which Mme de
Cambremer’s protégé takes infinite pains to link at one point to the
Scandinavian words _floi_ and _flo_, and at others to the Irish words
_ae_ and _aer_, is, on the contrary, and beyond any doubt, the _fiord_
of the Danes, and signifies a harbour. Similarly, the excellent priest
thinks that the station of Saint-Martin-le-Vêtu, which is next door to
La Raspelière, signifies Saint-Martin-le-Vieux (_vetus_). It’s a fact
that the word _vieux_ has played a major role in the toponymy of the
region. _Vieux_ generally comes from _vadum_ and signifies a ford, as in
the place known as Les Vieux, or as in the English Oxford and Hereford.
But in this particular instance, _vieux_ comes not from _vetus_ but from
_vastatus_, a bare, de-vastated place. Near here you have Sottevast, the
vast of Setold, Brillevast, the vast of Berold. I’m all the more certain
that the _curé_ is in error because Saint-Martin-le-Vieux was at one
time called Saint-Martin-du-Gast or even Saint-Martin-de-Terregate. Now
the _v_ and the _g_ in those words are the same letter. We say
_dévaster_ but also _gâcher. Jachères_ and _gâtines_⁵⁹ (from the High
German _wastinna_) have the same sense. Terregate, therefore, is _terra
vasta_. As for Saint-Mars, in the old days (_honni soit qui mal y
pense_!) Saint-Merd,⁶⁰ that is Saint-Medardus, which is sometimes
Saint-Médard, Saint-Mard, Saint-Marc, Cinq-Mars, all the way to Dammas.
It mustn’t be forgotten, moreover, that very near here, places bearing
this same name of Mars are evidence merely of a pagan origin (the god
Mars) that’s still very much alive in the region, but which the man of
God refuses to acknowledge. The heights dedicated to the gods in
particular are very numerous, like the mountain of Jupiter (Jeumont).
Your _curé_ is having none of it but, on the other hand, wherever
Christianity has left traces, they elude him. He extended his travels as
far as Loctudy, a barbarian name, he says, whereas it’s _Locus sancti
Tudeni_, nor, in Sammarcoles, has he divined _Sanctus Martialis_. Your
_curé_, Brichot went on, noticing that he was interesting me, makes the
words _hon, home_ and _holm_ come from the word _holl_ (_hullus_), a
hill, whereas it comes from the Norse _holm_, an island, which you’re
certainly familiar with in Stockholm, and which is so widespread
throughout the region: La Houlme, Engohomme, Tahoume, Robehomme,
Néhomme, Quettehou, and so on.’ These names brought to mind the day when
Albertine had wanted to go to Amfreville-la-Bigot (from the name of two
of its successive lords, Brichot told me), and when she had then
suggested we should eat together in Robehomme. As for Montmartin, we
would be passing it in a minute. ‘Is Néhomme, I asked, not near
Carquethuit and Clitourps? – Exactly, Néhomme is the _holm_, the island
or peninsula of the famous Vicomte Nigel, whose name has survived also
in Néville. For Mme de Cambremer’s protégé, Carquethuit and Clitourps,
which you spoke of, are an opportunity for other errors. He can see
easily enough of course that _carque_ is a church, the Germans’
_Kirche_. You’re familiar with Querqueville and Carquebut, not to
mention Dunkerque. For we’d do better then to pause at this famous word
_dun_, which for the Celts signified an elevation. That you’ll find
throughout France. Your _abbé_ has been hypnotized faced by Duneville.
But in the Eure-et-Loir he’d have found Châteaudun; Dun-le-Roi in the
Cher; Duneau in the Sarthe; Dun in the Ariège; Dune-les-Places in the
Nièvre, and so on and so forth. This _dun_ leads him to commit a curious
error in connection with Douville, where we shall be getting out and
where the comfortable carriages of Mme Verdurin await us. Douville, in
Latin _donvilla_, so he says. Indeed, Douville is at the foot of the big
heights. Your _curè_, who knows everything, senses all the same he has
blundered. He has in fact read _Domvilla_ in an old terrier. Then he
retracts; Douville, according to him, is a fief of the _abbé, domino
abbati_, of Mont Saint-Michel. That delights him, which is rather
bizarre when one reflects on the scandalous life that, since the
capitulary of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, they led at Mont Saint-Michel, and
which would be no more extraordinary than finding the King of Denmark as
suzerain of this whole coast, where he celebrated the worship of Odin
far more than that of Christ. On the other hand, the suppositions that
the _n_ got changed into a _u_ doesn’t shock me and requires less of a
deformation than the very correct Lyon, which also comes from _dun_
(_Lugdunum_). But the _abbé_ has in fact got it wrong. Douville was
never Donville, but Doville, _Eudonis Villa_, the village of Eudes.
Douville was once called Escalecliff, where you scaled the rise. Around
1233, Eudes the Cupbearer, lord of Escalecliff, left for the Holy Land;
at the moment of departure, he handed over the church to the Abbey of
Blanchelande. An exchange of courtesies: the village took his name,
whence present-day Douville. But I will add that toponymy, where I’m
anyway quite ignorant, is not an exact science; did we not have this
historical evidence, Douville might very well come from d’Ouville, i.e.
les Eaux, the waters. Forms in _ai_ (Aigues-Mortes), from _aqua_, very
often turn into _eu_, or _ou_. And there were renowned waters very close
to Douville. As you can imagine, the _curé_ was only too happy to find
some Christian vestige there, even if the region seems to have been hard
enough to evangelize since it took successive attempts by Saint Ursal,
Saint Gofroi, Saint Barsanore and Saint Laurent de Brèvedent, who
finally made way for the monks of Beaubec. But where _tuit_ is
concerned, the author is mistaken, he sees it as a form of _toft_, a
hovel, as in Criquetot, Ectot, Yvetot, whereas it’s the _thveit_, or
assart, land freshly cleared, as in Braquetuit, Le Thuit, Regnetuit, and
so on. Similarly, if, in Clitourps, he recognizes the Norman _thorp_,
which means village, he wants the first part of the name to derive from
_clivus_, an incline, whereas it comes from _cliff_ a rockface. But his
grossest blunders stem less from ignorance than from his prejudices.
However good a Frenchman you may be, do you have to deny what is
self-evident and take Saint-Laurent-en-Bray to be the well-known Roman
priest, whereas the saint in question is Saint Lawrence O’Toole,
Archbishop of Dublin? But more than his patriotic sentiments, it’s your
friend’s religious _parti pris_ that leads him to commit crude errors.
Thus, not far from the house of our hosts at La Raspelière, you have two
Montmartins, Montmartin-sur-Mer and Montmartin-en-Graignes. With
Graignes, the worthy _curé_ has not made any mistake, he’s seen clearly
that Graignes, _grania_ in Latin, _krene_ in Greek, signifies ponds,
marshland; how many Cresmays, Croens, Grennevilles, Lengronnes, could
one not cite? But with Montmartin your purported linguist insists it’s a
question of parishes dedicated to St Martin. His authority for this is
the fact that that saint is their patron, but he’s unaware that he was
only adopted as such after the event; or rather he’s blinded by his
hatred of paganism; he won’t see that people would have said
Mont-Saint-Martin as they say Mont-Saint-Michel, had it been a question
of St Martin, whereas the name of Montmartin applies in a far more pagan
fashion to temples consecrated to the god Mars, temples of which, it’s
true, we possess no other vestiges, but which would be made extremely
likely by the undeniable presence in the vicinity of vast Roman camps,
even without the name of Montmartin, which settles any doubts. So you
can see, the little book that you’ll find at La Raspelière is not so
very well done.’ I protested that in Combray the _curé_ had often taught
us interesting etymologies. ‘He was probably better on his home ground,
the journey to Normandy will have disoriented him. – And not cured him,
I added, because he arrived with neurasthenia and left with the
rheumatics. – Ah, that’s the fault of the neurasthenia. He fell from
neurasthenia into philology, as my good master Poquelin⁶¹ would have
said. I say, Cottard, does it seem to you that neurasthenia can have a
harmful influence on philology, and philology a calming influence on
neurasthenia, and that the cure for neurasthenia can lead to rheumatism?
– Absolutely, rheumatism and neurasthenia are two vicarious forms of
neuro-arthritis. You can pass from one to the other by metastasis. – The
eminent professor, said Brichot, expresses himself, may God forgive me,
in a French mixed in with as much Latin and Greek as M. Purgon himself
might have done, of Molièrish memory! Help, Uncle, I mean Sarcey,⁶² our
national…’ But he was unable to finish his sentence. The Professor had
just given a start and let out a shout: ‘Damn it all, what the…, he
cried, finally moving on to articulated speech, ‘we’ve passed Maineville
(hey, what!) and even Renneville.’ He had just noticed that the train
had stopped at Saint-Mars-le-Vieux, where almost all the passengers
alighted. ‘They can’t have gone through it without stopping, though. We
can’t have been paying attention, talking about the Cambremers. –
Listen, Ski, wait, I’m going to tell you “a good thing” ’, said Cottard,
who had developed a fondness for this expression, common in certain
medical circles. ‘The Princesse must be on the train, she won’t have
seen us but has got into another compartment. Let’s go and look for her.
Just so long as all this isn’t going to create ructions!’ And he led all
of us off in search of the Princesse Sherbatoff. He found her in the
corner of an empty carriage, busy reading the _Revue des Deux Mondes_.
Over long years, she had, from a fear of rejection, got into the habit
of staying put, of remaining in her corner, and of waiting until someone
wished her good day before giving her hand. She continued to read when
the faithful entered her carriage. I recognized her instantly; this
woman who might have come down in the world but was nevertheless of
noble birth, who was in any case the pearl of a salon like that of the
Verdurins, was the lady who, in this same train, two days earlier, I had
thought might be the madam of a brothel. Her very uncertain social
personality became clear to me the moment I learned her name, as when,
having toiled over a riddle, we finally learn the solution, which makes
clear everything that had remained obscure, and which in the case of
people is their name. To learn two days later who the person was next to
whom one had travelled on the train without managing to decide on their
social standing is a far more amusing surprise than reading in the
latest issue of a review the solution to the conundrum posed in the
previous issue. Great restaurants, casinos, ‘slowcoaches’, these are the
family museums of such social conundrums. ‘Princesse, we must have
missed you in Maineville! Will you allow us to come and sit in your
compartment? – Why of course,’ said the Princesse, who raised her eyes
from her review only when she heard Cottard address her, eyes which,
like those of M. de Charlus, although gentler, saw very clearly the
people whose presence she had pretended not to have noticed. Cottard,
reflecting on the fact that being invited with the Cambremers was for me
a sufficient recommendation, took, after a moment, the decision to
introduce me to the Princesse, who bowed with great courtesy, but gave
the impression of hearing my name for the first time. ‘Dammit, exclaimed
the Doctor, my wife’s forgotten to change the buttons on my white
waistcoat. Oh, women, they never think. Don’t ever get married, d’you
hear,’ he said to me. And as this was one of the pleasantries he thought
appropriate when there was nothing to be said, he glanced out of the
corner of his eye at the Princesse and at the other faithful, who,
because he was a professor and an Academician, smiled in admiration of
his good humour and lack of presumption. The Princesse informed us that
the young violinist had been found. He had kept to his bed the previous
day on account of a migraine, but would be coming this evening and
bringing an old friend of his father’s whom he had met again in
Doncières. She had learned this through Mme Verdurin, with whom ‘she had
had lunch that morning,’ she told us quickly, in a voice in which the
rolled _r_s of her Russian accent were quietly mumbled at the back of
her throat, as if they were not _r_s but _l_s. ‘Ah, you had lunch with
her this morning,’ said Cottard to the Princesse; but looking at me, for
the words were intended to demonstrate to me how intimate the Princesse
was with the Patronne. ‘You’re truly one of the faithful! – Yes, I like
the little gloup, intelligent, agleeable, without malice, velly simple,
not snobbish and where they’ve blains all the way down to their
fingertips. – Damnation, I must have lost my ticket, I can’t find it,’
exclaimed Cottard, without being unduly concerned, however. He knew that
at Douville, where two landaus would be awaiting us, the porter would
allow him through without a ticket and would simply doff his cap all the
lower in order, by this salute, to give the explanation of his
indulgence, to wit that he had indeed recognized Cottard to be a
Verdurin regular. ‘They won’t be putting me in the police room for that,
the Doctor concluded. – You were saying, Monsieur, I asked Brichot, that
there were some renowned waters near here; how do you know? – The name
of the next station confirms it, together with much other evidence. It’s
called Fervaches. – I don’t complehend what he means,’ grumbled the
Princesse, in the tone of voice in which she might have said to me, out
of kindness: ‘He’s getting on our nerves, isn’t he?’ ‘But, Princesse,
Fervaches means warm waters, _fervidae aquae_… But… apropos of the young
violinist, Brichot went on, I was forgetting, Cottard, to speak to you
about the big news. Did you know that our poor friend Dechambre,
formerly Mme Verdurin’s favourite pianist, has just died? It’s
frightening. – He was still young, replied Cottard, but he must have got
something amiss with his liver, he must have had something nasty there,
he’d looked rotten for some time. – But he wasn’t that young, said
Brichot, in the days when Elstir and Swann used to come to Mme
Verdurin’s, Dechambre already had a reputation in Paris and, what is
admirable, without having received his baptism of success abroad. _He_
was no adept of the Gospel according to St Barnum.⁶³ – You’re getting
him confused, he couldn’t have been going to Mme Verdurin’s at that
time, he was still in swadddling-clothes. – But unless my old memory’s
playing me false, I fancy Dechambre was playing the Vinteuil sonata for
Swann when that clubman, who’d broken with the aristocracy, hardly
suspected he would one day become the _embourgeoisé_ prince consort of
our national Odette. – That’s impossible, Vinteuil’s sonata was played
at Mme Verdurin’s long after Swann was no longer going there,’ said the
Doctor, who, like those people who work a great deal and think they
should retain many things that they imagine may be useful, forget many
others, which enables them to go into ecstasies at the memory of people
who have nothing to do. ‘You’re doing your knowledge an injustice, your
mind isn’t going, however,’ smiled the Doctor. Brichot conceded his
mistake. The train stopped. It was La Sogne. The name intrigued me. ‘I’d
love to know what all these names mean, I said to Cottard. – But ask M.
Brichot, he’ll know perhaps. – But La Sogne, is La Cicogne, _Siconia_,
the stork,’ replied Brichot, whom I was longing to question about many
other names.

Forgetting how keen she was on her ‘corner’, Mme Sherbatoff kindly
offered to change places with me so that I would be better able to talk
with Brichot, whom I wanted to ask for other etymologies that interested
me, and she assured me that it was a matter of indifference to her
whether she travelled forwards, backwards, standing up, or any other
way. She remained on the defensive for as long as she did not know the
intentions of the new arrivals, but once she had recognized that these
were friendly, she tried in every way possible to please each one of
them. Finally, the train stopped in the station of Douville-Féterne,
which, being more or less equidistant from the village of Féterne and
that of Douville, bore on account of this peculiarity both their names.
‘Zounds,’ exclaimed Doctor Cottard, once we were in front of the barrier
where the tickets were collected, and pretending only now to have
noticed, ‘I can’t find my ticket, I must have lost it.’ But the porter,
removing his cap, assured him it was of no account and smiled
respectfully. The Princesse (giving an explanation to the coachman, as a
sort of lady-in-waiting to Mme Verdurin might have done, who, on account
of the Cambremers, had not been able to come to the station, which she
did only rarely in any case) took me, together with Brichot, with her in
one of the carriages. Into the other there got the Doctor, Saniette and
Ski.

The coachman, though very young, was the Verdurins’ head coachman, the
only one actually to bear the title; during the day, he took them on all
their outings, for he knew all the roads, and in the evenings went to
fetch and later take back the faithful. He was accompanied by
auxiliaries (chosen by him) in case of need. He was an excellent lad,
sober and skilful, but with one of those melancholy faces whose too
fixed gaze signifies someone who is soon worked up, or even gets dark
thoughts, over nothing at all. But at that moment he was very happy for
he had managed to get his brother, another excellent sort, taken on by
the Verdurins. We went first through Douville. Here, grassy hillocks ran
right down to the sea, in ample grazing made lush, velvety and
exceptionally vivid in colour from its saturation by the damp and the
salt. The islets and indentations of Rivebelle, much closer together
here than in Balbec, lent this part of the sea the appearance, new to
me, of a relief map. We passed small chalets, almost all of them rented
by painters; we took a track on which some loose cows, just as alarmed
as our horses, barred our way for ten minutes, then we entered on the
road along the corniche. ‘But by the immortal gods, asked Brichot all of
a sudden, to revert to poor Dechambre; do you think Mme Verdurin
_knows_? has she been _told_?’ Like almost all society people, Mme
Verdurin, precisely because she had need of the company of others, never
gave them another thought after the day they died, and were no longer
able to come to her Wednesdays, or her Saturdays, or eat in a
dressing-gown. And it could not have been said of the little clan, the
image in this of all the salons, that it was made up more of the dead
than the living, seeing that the moment you were dead it was as if you
had never existed. But in order to avoid the nuisance of having to speak
of the deceased, or even to suspend the dinners, something quite out of
the question for the Patronne, as a sign of mourning, M. Verdurin would
pretend that the death of the faithful so affected his wife that, in the
interests of her health, it was not to be mentioned. Moreover, and
perhaps indeed just because the death of others struck him as so common
and final an accident, the thought of his own death filled him with
horror and he avoided any reflection that might bear on it. As for
Brichot, since he was a very decent man and completely taken in by what
M. Verdurin had said about his wife, he dreaded on his friend’s account
the emotions of such an upset. ‘Yes, she’s _known everything_ since this
morning, said the Princesse, we couldn’t _keep it from her_. – Oh, great
thundering Zeus, exclaimed Brichot, oh, that must have been a terrible
blow, a friend of twenty-five years’ standing! And who was one of us! –
How right, how right, but there you are, said Cottard. These are always
painful circumstances; but Mme Verdurin is a strong woman, she’s a
cerebral even more than an emotive. – I’m not altogether of the Doctor’s
opinion,’ said the Princesse, whose rapid way of speaking and muttered
accent gave her an expression decidedly at once sullen and mischievous.
‘Beneath a cold exterior, Mme Verdurin conceals treasures of
sensitivity. M. Verdurin told me he had great difficulty stopping her
from going to Paris for the ceremony; he was obliged to give her to
believe it would all take place in the country. – Ah, good heavens, she
wanted to go to Paris. But I know very well she’s a woman of heart, too
much heart perhaps. Poor Dechambre! As Mme Verdurin was saying not two
months since, “Compared with him, Planté, Paderewski, Risler even,⁶⁴
none of them count”. Ah, he had better reason than that show-off Nero,
who has found a way of hoodwinking German learning itself, to say
_Qualis artifex pereo_!⁶⁵ But Dechambre at least must have died in the
fulfilment of his ministry, in the odour of Beethovenian devotion; and
bravely, I don’t doubt; by rights, that officiant of German music would
have deserved to pass away while celebrating the Mass in D.⁶⁶ For all
that, he was a man to welcome the Grim Reaper with a trill, for that
performer of genius sometimes rediscovered in his ancestry, Parisianized
man of Champagne that he was, the swank and elegance of a
_garde-française_.⁶⁷

From the height at which we already were, the sea no longer looked, as
it did from Balbec, like the undulations of upraised mountains, but on
the contrary, the way a blue-coloured glacier, or a dazzling plain,
situated at a lower altitude, appears from a peak, or from a road that
hugs the mountainside. The jagged swirls seemed to have become
immobilized and to have traced their concentric circles once and for
all; the very enamel of the sea, which changed colour imperceptibly,
took on, towards the end of the bay, where an estuary had been scooped
out, the blueish whiteness of milk, in which small black ferryboats
seemed trapped like flies, unable to advance. I fancied that from
nowhere else could you have discovered so vast a tableau. But at each
bend in the road, a new portion was added to it and when we reached the
tollhouse of Douville, the spur of cliff that had hitherto hidden one
half of the bay from us, drew back, and I suddenly saw to my left a gulf
as deep as that which hitherto I had had in front of me, but whose
proportions it altered while doubling its beauty. In this very elevated
spot, the air had become of a keenness and purity that intoxicated me. I
loved the Verdurins; that they should have sent a carriage for us seemed
so kind as to be touching. I would have liked to kiss the Princesse. I
told her I had never seen anything so beautiful. She, too, professed to
love this country more than any other. But I had a strong sense that for
her, as for the Verdurins, the important thing was not to gaze on it
like tourists, but to eat well there, to entertain company that they
enjoyed, to write letters, to read, in short to live in it, allowing its
beauty to wash passively over them rather than making it the object of
their concerns.

From the toll-house, the carriage having stopped for a moment at such a
height above the sea that, as from a mountain-top, the view of the blue
gulf almost gave you vertigo, I opened the window; the softness and
clarity of the sound of each wave as it broke, distinct to the ear, had
something sublime about it. Was it not like an index of measurement
which, overturning our customary impressions, proves that vertical
distances can be assimilated to horizontal distances, contrary to the
representation our minds usually make of them; and that, bringing the
sky closer to us as they do, they are not great; that they are less
great even for a sound that covers them, as that of the little waves was
doing, because the medium that it has to traverse is purer? Indeed, if
you drew no more than two metres back from the tollhouse, you could no
longer make out the sound of the waves, which two hundred metres of
cliff had not robbed of its delicate, meticulous, gentle precision. I
told myself that my grandmother would have felt for it the admiration
inspired in her by all those manifestations of nature or of art into
whose simplicity grandeur may be read. My exaltation was at its height,
and raised up all that surrounded me. I was touched that the Verdurins
should have sent to fetch us from the station. I said as much to the
Princesse, who seemed to think I was making far too much of a quite
simple courtesy. I know that she later confessed to Cottard that she
found me very enthusiastic; he replied that I was too emotional, that I
would have needed sedatives and to take up knitting. I remarked to the
Princesse on each tree, each little house crumbling beneath its roses, I
made her admire everything, I would like to have pressed her to my
heart. She told me she could see I had a gift for painting, that I
should draw, that she was surprised I had not been told that before. And
she admitted that the country here was indeed picturesque. We went
through, perched on its height, the little village of Englesqueville
(_Engleberti Villa_, Brichot told us). ‘But are you quite sure that this
evening’s dinner is taking place, despite Dechambre’s death, Princesse?
he added, without reflecting that the fact that the carriages in which
we were had come to the station was in itself an answer. – Yes, said the
Princesse, M. Veldulin was insistent it shouldn’t be put off, plecisely
in order to stop his wife ‘thinking’. Besides, after all these years
when she has never failed to entertain on a Wednesday, the change in her
habits might have left its mark on her. She is tellibly nervous these
days. M. Verdurin was especially pleased you were coming to dinner this
evening because he knew it would be a great distraction for Mme
Verdurin,’ said the Princesse, forgetting her pretence of not having
heard of me. ‘I think you’d do well not to say _anything_ in front of
Mme Verdurin, added the Princesse. – Ah, you do well to tell me, replied
Brichot artlessly. I’ll pass that recommendation on to Cottard.’ The
carriage stopped for a moment. It started off again, but the noise the
wheels had been making in the village ceased. We had entered on the
grand driveway of La Raspelière, where M. Verdurin was waiting for us on
the steps. ‘I did right putting on a dinner-jacket, he said,
ascertaining with pleasure that the faithful were in theirs, since I
have such smart men.’ And as I apologized for my own jacket: ‘Oh come,
that’s ideal. Here we dine among friends. I’d gladly offer to lend you
one of my dinner-jackets, but it wouldn’t fit you.’ The very feeling
handshake which, as he entered the hallway of La Raspelière, and by way
of condolences for the death of the pianist, Brichot gave the Patron,
provoked no comment from the latter. I told him of my admiration for the
region. ‘Ah, so much the better, yet you’ve seen nothing, we’ll show it
to you. Why don’t you come and stay here for a few weeks? The air is
excellent.’ Brichot feared that his handshake might not have been
understood. ‘Well, well, poor Dechambre!’ he said, but in a low voice,
for fear that Mme Verdurin might not be far away. ‘It’s frightful,
replied M. Verdurin cheerfully. – So young,’ Brichot went on. Annoyed at
being detained by these futilities, M. Verdurin replied hurriedly and
with a shrill groan, not of grief but of irritated impatience: ‘Well,
yes, but there you are, there’s nothing we can do about it, our words
aren’t going to bring him back to life, are they?’ And gentleness
returning along with his joviality: ‘Come on, my good Brichot, put your
things down quickly. We’ve got a bouillabaisse which won’t wait. Above
all, in the name of goodness, don’t go mentioning Dechambre to Mme
Verdurin! You know she hides a lot of what she feels, but she’s so
sensitive it’s like a genuine sickness. I swear to you, when she heard
that Dechambre was dead, she almost wept,’ said M. Verdurin in a
profoundly ironic tone. Hearing him, you would have said that it
required a sort of dementia to mourn for a friend of thirty years’
standing, while gathering on the other hand that the perpetual union of
M. Verdurin and his wife did not preclude the former from constantly
passing judgment on her and the latter from frequently irritating him.
‘If you mention it to her she’ll go and get ill again. It’s lamentable,
three weeks after her bronchitis. And in these cases, it’s me who’s the
sick-nurse. You can understand I’ve only just been through it. Grieve
all you want for the fate of Dechambre in your heart. Think about it,
but don’t speak of it. I loved Dechambre dearly, but you can’t begrudge
me loving my wife even more dearly. Here, there’s Cottard, you’ll be
able to ask him.’ And indeed, he knew that there are many small services
a family doctor is able to render, such, for example, as prescribing
that we must not feel grief.

Cottard had said, docilely, to the Patronne: ‘Upset yourself like that
and tomorrow you’ll be giving _me_ a temperature of 39,’ as he might
have said to the cook: ‘Tomorrow you can give me a _ris de veau_.’ For
want of curing us, medicine busies itself altering the meanings of verbs
and pronouns.

M. Verdurin was happy to confirm that, despite the rebuffs he had
suffered two days earlier, Saniette had not deserted the little nucleus.
In their idleness, Mme Verdurin and her husband had in fact developed
cruel instincts, for which the great occasions were too infrequent any
longer to suffice. They had been able indeed to turn Odette against
Swann, and Brichot against his mistress. And they would repeat it with
others, that was understood. But the opportunity did not present itself
every day. Whereas, thanks to his quivering sensitivity, and his
fearful, quickly panic-stricken shyness, Saniette offered them an
everyday whipping-boy. And so, for fear of his defaulting, they took
care to invite him with friendly and persuasive words such as those who
have been held back a year at the _lycée_, or old sweats in the army,
use to a tyro whom they want to butter up so as to be able to grab hold
of him, with the one aim of then tickling or bullying him once he can no
longer escape. ‘Above all, Cottard, who had not heard M. Verdurin,
reminded Brichot, not a word in front of Mme Verdurin. – Fear not, O
Cottard, you see before you a sage, as Theocritus has it.⁶⁸ M. Verdurin
is right, moreover, what use are our lamentations?’ he added, for,
capable of assimilating forms of words and the ideas to which they gave
rise in him, but being without finesse, he found M. Verdurin’s words
admirable for their very courageous stoicism. ‘All the same, it’s a
great talent who has left us. – What, are you still talking about
Dechambre?’ said M. Verdurin, who had gone ahead of us but, noticing
that we were not following, had turned back. ‘Listen, he said to
Brichot, there’s never any need to exaggerate. Because he’s dead isn’t a
reason to make him into the genius he wasn’t. He played well, agreed,
above all he had the right setting here; transplanted, he no longer
existed. My wife became besotted with him and made his reputation. You
know how she is. I shall say moreover that, for that same reputation’s
sake, he died at just the right moment, _à point_, just as the
_demoiselles de Caen_ are about to be, I hope, grilled in accordance
with the incomparable recipes of Pampille⁶⁹ (unless you’re going to keep
on for ever with your jeremiads here in this Casbah open to all the
winds). You surely can’t want to kill all of us off just because
Dechambre is dead, when for the last year he’d been obliged to play
scales before giving a concert, so as to get his suppleness back
temporarily, very temporarily. In any case, this evening you’re going to
hear, or at least encounter, for after dinner the young monkey too often
abandons art for cards, someone who’s far more of an artist than
Dechambre, a youngster my wife discovered (just as she discovered
Dechambre, and Paderewski and the others): Morel. The confounded fellow
hasn’t arrived yet. I’m going to be obliged to send a carriage to the
last train. He’s coming with an old friend of his family’s who he’s met
again and who bores him to death, but who otherwise, so as not to have
his father complaining, he’d have been obliged to remain with in
Doncières, to keep him company: the Baron de Charlus.’ The faithful went
in. M. Verdurin, who had stayed behind with me while I took off my
things, took me jokingly by the arm, like a host at a dinner party who
has no lady guest to give you to take in. ‘Did you have a good journey?
– Yes, M. Brichot taught me things that interested me greatly,’ I said,
thinking of the etymologies and because I had heard that the Verdurins
greatly admired Brichot. ‘I’d have been surprised if he hadn’t taught
you something, said M. Verdurin, he’s such a self-effacing man, who
talks so seldom about the things he knows.’ This compliment did not
strike me as very accurate. ‘He has a charming way with him, I said. –
Exquisite, delightful, not at all pedantic, whimsical, light-hearted, my
wife adores him, I do, too!’ replied M. Verdurin, in a tone of
exaggeration and as if reciting a lesson. Only then did I realize that
what he had said about Brichot was ironic. And I wondered whether M.
Verdurin, since those distant days of which I had heard speak, had not
shaken off his wife’s tutelage.

The sculptor was much surprised to learn that the Verdurins had
consented to receive M. de Charlus. Whereas in the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, where M. de Charlus was so well known, his habits were
never referred to (not known to the great majority, an object of
uncertainty for others, whose idea was more of intense but platonic
friendships and indiscretions, and carefully concealed by those alone in
the know, who would shrug their shoulders when some ill-natured
Gallardon ventured an insinuation), these same habits, scarcely known
about save to a few intimates, were on the contrary denounced daily far
away from the circle in which he lived, like the gunfire that is heard
only after the interference of a zone of silence. Moreover, in those
bourgeois and artistic circles where he was looked on as the very
embodiment of inversion, his high standing in society and his exalted
origins were wholly unknown, through a phenomenon analogous to that
whereby, among the people of Romania, the name of Ronsard is known for
that of a great nobleman, whereas his poetic oeuvre is unknown there.⁷⁰
On top of which, Ronsard’s nobility rests on an error in Romania.
Similarly, if in the world of painters and actors, M. de Charlus had
such a bad reputation, this stemmed from the fact that he had been
confused with a certain Comte Leblois de Charlus, who was not even
faintly, or only very distantly related to him, and who had been
arrested, perhaps in error, during a police raid that was still talked
about. In short, all the stories recounted of M. de Charlus applied to
the false one. Many professionals swore that they had had dealings with
M. de Charlus, and in good faith, believing the false Charlus to be the
true one, and the false one perhaps encouraging, half as parading his
noble birth, half as concealing his vice, a confusion which was for a
long time prejudicial to the real Charlus (the Baron whom we have met),
but which then, once he was on the slippery slope, became a convenience,
since it enabled him also to say ‘It wasn’t me.’ At present, indeed, the
talk was not of him. What added to the falsehood of the comments about a
true fact (the Baron’s tastes) was that he had been the close and
perfectly innocent friend of an author who, in the world of the theatre,
had, no one knew why, the same reputation without in any way deserving
it. When they were seen together at a first night, people said ‘You
know,’ just as it was believed that the Duchesse de Guermantes had an
immoral relationship with the Princesse de Parme; an indestructible
legend, for it would have evaporated only at a proximity to these two
great ladies to which the people who retailed it would most likely never
attain, save when turning their lorgnettes on to them at the theatre and
slandering them to the occupant of the next stall. The sculptor was all
the less hesitant about concluding from M. de Charlus’s habits that the
Baron’s standing in society also must be bad because he possessed no
information of any kind about the family to which M. de Charlus
belonged, neither his title, nor his name. Just as Cottard thought that
everyone knows that the title of Doctor of Medicine means nothing, and
that of house surgeon something, so society people are mistaken in
imagining that everyone holds the same ideas as themselves and those of
their circle concerning the social significance of their names.

The Prince d’Agrigente passed for a foreign vulgarian in the eyes of a
club _chasseur_ to whom he owed twenty-five _louis_, and resumed his
importance only in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, where he had three
sisters who were duchesses, for the great nobleman has some effect, not
on people of modest means, in the eyes of whom he counts for little, but
on the brilliant ones, well informed as to his status. For the rest, M.
de Charlus was to be able to realize that same evening that the Patron
had only very superficial notions concerning the most illustrious ducal
families. Convinced that it would be a _faux pas_ on the Verdurins’ part
to allow a tainted individual to be introduced into their very ‘select’
salon, the sculptor thought he should take the Patronne aside. ‘You’re
entirely mistaken, anyway I never believe that sort of thing, and
besides, even if it were true, I can tell you it wouldn’t exactly be
compromising me!’ replied Mme Verdurin, furious, for Morel being the
principal ingredient of her Wednesdays, she was anxious before all else
not to upset him. As for Cottard, he could not give an opinion for he
had asked to go upstairs for a moment ‘on a brief errand’ in the _buen
retiro_,⁷¹ and then to write a very urgent letter on behalf of a patient
in M. Verdurin’s bedroom.
An important publisher from Paris, there on a visit and who had thought
he would be asked to stay, went abruptly off, without delay,
understanding that he was not fashionable enough for the little clan. He
was a tall, powerful man, very dark, studious, with something
sharp-edged about him. He looked like an ebony paper knife.⁷²

Mme Verdurin who, in order to receive us in her immense drawing-room,
where trophies of ornamental grasses, poppies and wildflowers, picked
that same day, alternated with the same motif painted in camaieu, two
centuries earlier, by an artist of exquisite taste, had got up for a
moment from a game of cards she was having with an old friend, and asked
for two minutes’ grace in order to finish it while going on talking to
us. What I told her of my impressions was only half agreeable to her,
however. For one thing, I was shocked to find that she and her husband
came back in every day long before it was time for the sunsets that were
held to be so beautiful, seen from these cliffs, and even more so from
the terrace at La Raspelière, for the sake of which I would have
travelled great distances. ‘Yes, they’re incomparable, said Mme Verdurin
off-handedly, with a glance at the immense casements that formed a
French window. For all that we see them all the time, we never grow
tired of them’, and her eyes went back to the cards. But my very
enthusiasm had made me demanding. I complained of not being able to see
from the drawing-room the rocks at Darnetal that Elstir had told me were
adorable at this hour of the day, when they refracted so many colours.
‘Oh, you can’t see them from here, you’d need to go to the end of the
garden, to the “Bay-view”. From the seat there you can take in the whole
panorama. But you can’t go there on your own, you’d get lost. I’ll take
you there, if you like, she added, lamely. – No you don’t, come on,
weren’t the pains you had the other day enough, d’you want to get more
of them? He can come back, he’ll see the view of the bay another time.’
I did not insist, and I realized that for the Verdurins it was enough to
know that the setting sun was here in their drawing-room or their
dining-room, like a magnificent painting, or a precious Japanese enamel,
justifying the high price at which they were renting La Raspelière fully
furnished, but to which they seldom raised their eyes; their main
business here was to live agreeably, to go on excursions, to eat well,
to talk, to entertain agreeable friends whom they made play amusing
games of billiards, have good meals and cheerful tea-parties. I found
later on, however, how intelligently they had learned to know the
locality, taking their guests on excursions as ‘original’ as the music
to which they made them listen. The part that the flowers at La
Raspelière, the roads along by the sea, the old houses and the unknown
churches played in M. Verdurin’s life was so great that those who saw
him only in Paris, and who had themselves replaced the life of the
seaside and the country with the luxuries of the city, could scarcely
comprehend the idea he had formed of his own life, and the importance
that his pleasures lent it in his own eyes. This importance had been
further increased by the fact that the Verdurins were convinced that La
Raspelière, which they were counting on buying, was a property unique in
the world. As they saw it, the superiority that their _amour propre_ had
led them to ascribe to La Raspelière justified my enthusiasm, which
would otherwise have somewhat irritated them, including as it did the
disappointments (like those I had once suffered on first hearing Berma)
of which I had made sincere confession to them.

‘I hear the carriage returning. Let’s hope it found them,’ the Patronne
suddenly murmured. Let it be said in a word that Mme Verdurin, aside
even from the changes made inevitable by age, no longer resembled what
she had been in the days when Swann and Odette were listening to the
little phrase in her house. Even when it was being played, she was no
longer obliged to wear that look of exhausted admiration she had adopted
in the old days, for it had become her face. Under the impact of
countless attacks of neuralgia, brought on by the music of Bach, Wagner,
Vinteuil and Debussy, Mme Verdurin’s forehead had assumed vast
proportions, like limbs finally deformed by rheumatism. Her temples,
like two beautiful burning spheres, pain-filled and milky white, in
which Harmony rolls undyingly round, had pushed back her silvery tresses
on either side and proclaimed, on the Patronne’s behalf, without the
latter having any need to speak, ‘I know what awaits me this evening.’
Her features no longer took the trouble to formulate the succession of
too strong aesthetic impressions, for they were themselves their
permanent expression as it were, in a face both ravaged and majestic.
This attitude of resignation to the ever-imminent sufferings inflicted
on her by the Beautiful, and of the courage that it took to put on a
gown when one was scarcely recovered from the last sonata, meant that,
even when listening to the cruellest music, Mme Verdurin kept a
disdainfully impassive face and even hid herself in order to swallow her
two spoonfuls of aspirin.

‘Ah yes, here they are!’ exclaimed a relieved M. Verdurin, seeing the
door open on Morel, followed by M. de Charlus. The latter, for whom to
dine _chez_ Verdurin was certainly not to go into society, but into some
place of ill-repute, was as self-conscious as a schoolboy entering for
the first time into a brothel and overdoing his respects to the madam.
Thus M. de Charlus’s customary wish to appear virile and unmoved was
overcome (when he appeared in the open doorway) by those notions of a
traditional politeness which reawaken the moment self-consciousness
destroys an artificial attitude and summons up the resources of the
unconscious. When this sense of an instinctive, atavistic politeness
towards strangers takes effect in a Charlus, whether he be a nobleman or
a bourgeois for that matter, it is always the soul of a relative of the
female sex, auxiliary like a goddess or incarnate like a double, who
undertakes to introduce him into a new drawing-room and to shape his
attitude until such time as he arrives in front of his hostess. Thus
will a young painter, brought up by a saintly Protestant cousin, enter,
his head on one side and tremulous, looking up at the sky, his hands
clutching an invisible muff, the evoked shape of which, together with
the real tutelary presence, will assist the self-conscious artist to
cross, without any agoraphobia, the chasm-filled space leading from the
ante-room into the small drawing-room. Thus it was that the pious
relative, the memory of whom is guiding him today, had entered many
years ago, with so mournful an expression that they wondered what
misfortune she had come to announce, when, from her opening words, they
realized, as now with the painter, that she had come to pay a digestive
call. By virtue of the same law which holds that, in the interests of an
action as yet unperformed, life should exploit, utilize, denature, by a
perpetual prostitution, the most respectable, at times the most sacred,
and sometimes only the most innocent legacies from the past, and
although it might then engender a different aspect, that one of Mme
Cottard’s nephews who had caused distress to his family by his
effeminate ways and the company that he kept, always made his entry
joyfully, as if he had come to give you a surprise or announce an
inheritance, radiating a happiness of which it would have been pointless
to inquire the cause, but which derived from his unconscious heredity
and his misplaced sex. He would walk on tiptoe, was himself astonished
no doubt not to be holding in his hand a book of visiting-cards, held
out his hand while opening his mouth into a heart-shape, as he had seen
his aunt doing, and his one worried glance was at the mirror, where he
seemed to want to make sure, bare-headed though he was, whether, as Mme
Cottard had asked Swann one day, his hat was not on crooked. As for M.
de Charlus, whom the society in which he had lived had provided, at this
critical juncture, with different examples, other arabesques of
affability, and the maxim that we must be able, in certain cases, even
for members of the petty bourgeoisie, to show off and exploit our rarest
charms, normally held in reserve, it was fluttering affectedly, and with
the same ampleness to his waddlings as though they were hobbled and made
broader by his being in a skirt, that he made for Mme Verdurin, wearing
so flattered and honoured an expression that you might have thought that
to be introduced to her was for him a supreme favour. His half-bowed
face, on which self-satisfaction did battle with propriety, was creased
by small lines of affability. You might have thought you saw Mme de
Marsantes coming forward, so conspicuous at that moment was the woman
that nature’s error had introduced into M. de Charlus’s body. It is true
that the Baron had laboured hard to conceal that error, and to acquire a
masculine appearance. But hardly had he succeeded before, having during
this same time preserved the same tastes, the habit of feeling as a
woman lent him a new feminine appearance, engendered this time not by
his heredity but by his individual way of life. And since he had
gradually come to think, even about social matters, in the feminine, and
this without even noticing, for it is not only by dint of lying to
others, but also of lying to ourselves, that we cease to notice that we
are lying, although he had demanded of his body that it manifest (at the
moment of entering the Verdurins’ house) all the courtesy of a great
nobleman, that body, which had clearly grasped what M. de Charlus had
ceased to understand, deployed all the seductiveness of a _grande dame_,
to the point where the Baron might have merited the epithet of
‘lady-like’. Can we in any case entirely separate M. de Charlus’s
appearance from the fact that, sons not always taking after their
fathers, even if they are not inverts and go in pursuit of women, they
may consummate the profanation of their mothers in their faces? But let
us here leave what would merit a chapter on its own: the profanation of
mothers.

Although other reasons may have presided over this transformation in M.
de Charlus, and purely physical ferments have caused matter to ‘work’ in
him and his body gradually to pass over into the category of women’s
bodies, the change we are here registering was spiritual in origin. By
dint of believing ourselves to be ill, we become so, we lose weight, we
no longer have the strength to get up, we suffer from nervous enteritis.
By dint of having tender thoughts about men, we become a woman and a
false skirt impedes our steps. In such cases, the _idée fixe_ can modify
(as in other cases our health) our gender. Morel, who was behind him,
came to greet me. From that moment on, because of a twofold change that
had occurred in him, he created (I was unable to take account of it soon
enough, alas!) a bad impression on me. Here is why. I have said that
Morel, having escaped from servitude under his father, generally
indulged in a very disdainful familiarity. On the day when he had
brought me the photographs, he had spoken without even once calling me
‘Monsieur’, treating me condescendingly. How surprised I was then, at
Mme Verdurin’s, to find him bowing very low to me, and to me alone, and
to hear, even before any other utterance, words of respect, most
respectful – the words I had thought it impossible to bring beneath his
pen or onto his lips – being addressed to me! I at once got the
impression he had something to ask of me. Leading me aside a minute or
two later: ‘Monsieur would be doing me a very great service, he said,
going so far this time as to address me in the third person, by
concealing altogether from Mme Verdurin and her guests the kind of
profession that my father exercised at his uncle’s. It would be better
to say that, in your family, he was the steward of estates so vast that
it made him the equal practically of your parents.’ Morel’s request
annoyed me very greatly, not because it forced me to exaggerate his
father’s situation, which was all one to me, but my own father’s at
least apparent wealth, which I thought ridiculous. But so unhappy and so
urgent was his expression that I did not refuse. ‘No, before dinner, he
said in a tone of entreaty, Monsieur has countless pretexts for taking
Mme Verdurin aside.’ Which was what in fact I did, attempting as best I
could to enhance the distinction of Morel’s father, without exaggerating
overmuch the ‘standard of living’ or the ‘worldly wealth’ of my family.
This was accepted without a murmur, despite the astonishment of Mme
Verdurin, who had known my grandfather slightly. But as she lacked tact,
and detested families (that solvent of the little nucleus), after
telling me that she had once caught sight of my great-grandfather, and
speaking of him as of some semi-imbecile who would not have understood
the first thing about the little group and who, as she put it, ‘was not
one of us’, she said: ‘Families are such a nuisance in any case, one
aspires only to escape from them’; and she at once recounted one of my
grandfather’s traits of which I was unaware, although at home I had had
suspicions (I never knew him, but he was much talked about) as to his
uncommon avariciousness (as opposed to the rather too ostentatious
generosity of my great-uncle, the friend of the lady in pink and Morel’s
father’s employer): ‘The very fact that your grandparents had such a
smart steward proves that there are people of every stripe in a family.
Your grandfather’s father was so miserly that, almost gaga by the end of
his life – between ourselves, he was never very bright, you make up for
all of them – he couldn’t bring himself to spend three _sous_ on an
omnibus. So that they were obliged to have someone go after him, to pay
the conductor separately, and give the old skinflint to believe that his
friend, M. de Persigny,⁷³ a minister of state, had arranged for him to
travel on the buses gratis. Anyway, I’m very glad that _our_ Morel’s
father should have been so respectable. I’d understood he taught at a
_lycée_, but never mind, I’d misunderstood. But it hardly matters, for I
must tell you that here we appreciate only people’s inner worth, the
personal contribution, what I call participation. Provided you are of
the guild, provided in short you are of the brotherhood, the rest
matters little.’ Morel’s way of being of it – so far as I could make out
– was to be sufficiently fond of both men and women to give pleasure to
either sex with the help of the experiments he had conducted on the
other; as will be seen in due course. But what it is essential to say
here is that, the moment I had given him my word to approach Mme
Verdurin, the moment I had done so above all, when there was no going
back, Morel’s ‘respect’ for me took wing as if by magic, the respectful
formulae vanished, and for a time he avoided me even, contriving to make
it look as though he despised me, so that if Mme Verdurin wanted me to
say something to him, to ask him for a particular piece of music, he
went on talking to one of the faithful, then moved on to another, and
changed his position if I went up to him. They were obliged to tell him
up to three or four times that I had addressed him, after which he would
answer me, briefly, with an air of constraint, unless we were alone. In
which case, he was expansive and amicable, for he had charming sides to
his character. I concluded nonetheless from that first evening that he
must be low by nature, that he would not shrink when need be from any
obsequiousness and knew nothing of gratitude. In which he resembled the
common run of mankind. But as I had something of my grandmother in me,
and took pleasure in men’s diversity without expecting anything from
them or holding anything against them, I overlooked his servility, took
pleasure in his gaiety when it showed itself, and even in what I took to
have been genuine friendship on his part when, having reviewed the full
range of his false knowledge of human nature, he realized (in fits and
starts, for he had strange regressions to his blind and primitive
savagery) that my kindness towards him was disinterested, that my
indulgence stemmed not from a lack of clear-sightedness but from what he
called goodness of heart, and above all I was enchanted by his artistry,
which was hardly anything more than an admirable virtuosity but which
caused me (without his being in the intellectual sense of the word a
true musician) to hear again, or to get to know, so much beautiful
music. Moreover, a manager, M. de Charlus, of whose talents in this
direction I had been unaware (although Mme de Guermantes, who had known
a very different Charlus in their young days, claimed that he had
written her a sonata, had painted a fan for her, and so on), modest
where his own superior abilities, first-rate though they were, were
concerned, had been able to harness this virtuosity to a manifold
artistic sense, which magnified it tenfold. You are to imagine some
merely skilful performer from the Ballets Russes, trained, taught and
brought on in every sense by M. de Diaghilev.

I had just passed on to Mme Verdurin the message I had been entrusted
with by Morel and was talking to M. de Charlus about Saint-Loup, when
Cottard entered the drawing-room to announce, as if there were a fire,
that the Cambremers were arriving. So as not to appear, in front of
newcomers like M. de Charlus (whom Cottard had not seen) and myself, to
attach too great an importance to the arrival of the Cambremers, Mme
Verdurin did not stir, made no response to the announcement of this
news, but contented herself with saying to the Doctor, fanning herself
gracefully and in the same artificial tone of voice as a marquise at the
Théâtre-Français: ‘The Baron was just saying…’ This was too much for
Cottard! Less animatedly than would once have been the case, for his
practice and his high positions had slowed down his delivery, but with
the emotion all the same that he recovered at the Verdurins’: ‘A Baron!
Where, where’s a Baron? Where’s a Baron?’ he exclaimed, looking around
for him with an astonishment bordering on incredulity. Mme Verdurin,
with the affected indifference of a hostess one of whose servants has
just smashed a precious glass in front of her guests, and with the
artificial, over-shrill intonation of a first prizewinner at the
Conservatoire playing in Dumas _fils_,⁷⁴ replied, indicating Morel’s
patron with her fan: ‘But the Baron de Charlus, to whom I am about to
introduce you… Monsieur le Professeur Cottard.’ Mme Verdurin was not
displeased as it happens to have an opportunity to play the lady. M. de
Charlus held out two fingers, which the Professor shook with the
benevolent smile of a ‘prince of science’. But he stopped dead on seeing
the Cambremers enter, while M. de Charlus drew me into a corner to say a
word to me, not without feeling my muscles, which is a German custom. M.
de Cambremer bore little resemblance to the old Marquise. He was, as she
used affectionately to put it, ‘altogether on his father’s side’. For
anyone who had only heard speak of him, or even of letters from him, of
a lively and apt turn of phrase, his physical appearance was a surprise.
No doubt you would grow accustomed to it. But his nose, in order to come
and take up its crooked position above his mouth, had chosen perhaps the
one oblique line, out of so many, that you would never have thought of
tracing on that face, one which denoted a common stupidity, made even
worse by the proximity of an apple-red Norman complexion. It is possible
that M. de Cambremer’s eyes had preserved in their lids something of
that Le Cotentin sky, so soft on those beautiful sunny days when the
stroller is amused to see, halted beside the road, and to count in their
hundreds, the shadows of the poplar trees, but those heavy, rheumy,
badly drooping eyelids would have prevented intelligence itself from
passing through. And so, disconcerted by the thinness of that blue gaze,
you turned back to the big, crooked nose. By a transposition of the
senses, M. de Cambremer looked at you with his nose. This nose of M. de
Cambremer’s was not ugly, but rather a little too beautiful, too strong,
too vain of its own importance. Hooked, polished, shiny, spanking new,
it was quite prepared to make up for the spiritual insufficiency of his
gaze; unfortunately, if the eyes are sometimes the organ in which
intelligence is revealed, the nose (whatever their intimate solidarity
and the unsuspected repercussions of one feature on the others), the
nose is generally the organ in which stupidity exhibits itself the most
readily.

For all that the decorousness of the sombre clothing that M. de
Cambremer always wore, even in the mornings, reassured those dazzled and
exasperated by the insolent brilliance of the beach costumes of the
people whom they did not know, you could not understand why the wife of
the First President should declare, with an air of expertise and of
authority, as someone having had greater experience of Alençon’s high
society than yourself, that with M. de Cambremer you at once felt
yourself, even before knowing who he was, in the presence of a man of
great refinement, a man of perfect breeding, who made a change after the
Balbec kind, a man in short in whose company you could breathe freely.
On her, asphyxiated as she was by so many Balbec tourists, who knew
nothing of her world, he had the effect of a flask of smelling-salts. He
struck me, on the contrary, as one of those people whom my grandmother
would have at once found to be ‘quite unpresentable’, and since she did
not understand snobbery, she would no doubt have been amazed that he had
managed to be married to Mlle Legrandin, who must have been very hard to
satisfy when it came to refinement, she whose brother was so very
‘presentable’. At best, it might have been said of M. de Cambremer’s
common ugliness that it rather belonged to the locality, possessing
something of its ancient past; faced by his defective features, which
one would have liked to rectify, you thought of the names of those small
Normandy towns about whose etymology my _curé_ had been mistaken,
because the country people, articulating badly or having understood
amiss the Norman or Latin word that designated them, had finally
perpetuated a misconception and a corrupt pronunciation in a barbarism
that was already to be found in the cartularies, as Brichot would have
said. Life in these small old towns can anyway be spent agreeably, and
M. de Cambremer must have had his good qualities, for if it was only
natural that, as a mother, the old Marquise should have preferred her
son to her daughter-in-law, she often declared in return, she who had
several children, two or three of whom were not without talents, that
the Marquis was in her opinion the best one of the family. During the
short time he had spent in the army, his comrades, finding Cambremer too
much of a mouthful, had given him the nickname of Cancan,⁷⁵ which he had
as it happens in no way deserved. He knew how to adorn a dinner party to
which he had been invited by saying on the arrival of the fish course
(even were the fish to be high) or the entrée: ‘I say though, what a
fine beast we seem to have here.’ And his wife, having, on entering the
family, adopted all that she thought formed part of this society’s style
of living, put herself on to the same level as her husband’s friends,
and sought perhaps to please him like a mistress, as if in the old days
she had been involved in his life as a bachelor, by saying with a
detached air when talking about him to officers: ‘You’ll be seeing
Cancan. Cancan has gone to Balbec, but he’ll be back this evening.’ She
was furious to be jeopardizing her reputation this evening at the
Verdurins’ and had done so only at the entreaties of her mother-in-law
and husband, for the sake of the tenancy. But being less well brought up
than they, she made no secret of the motive and for the past fortnight
had been having a good laugh with her woman friends about this dinner.
‘You know we’re having dinner with our tenants. That’ll be well worth a
rise. Basically, I’m rather curious to find out what they may have done
to our poor old La Raspelière (as though she had been born there, and
found it full of mementos of her family). Our old keeper told me only
yesterday the whole place has become unrecognizable. I don’t dare to
think about all that must be going on in there. I think we’d do well to
have it all fumigated before we move back in.’ She arrived haughty and
morose, with the air of a great lady whose château, on account of a war,
has been occupied by the enemy, but who feels at home nonetheless and is
keen to show the victors that they are intruders. Mme de Cambremer could
not see me to start with, for I was in a bay to one side with M. de
Charlus, who was telling me he had learned from Morel that his father
had been a ‘steward’ in my family, and that he, Charlus, was relying
sufficiently on my intelligence and my magnanimity (a term common to
both him and Swann) to deny myself the mean and unworthy pleasure that
common young imbeciles (I had been warned) would not fail to take in my
position by revealing to our hosts details that the latter might think
demeaning. ‘The mere fact that I take an interest in him and extend my
protection over him has something supereminent about it and abolishes
the past,’ concluded the Baron. Even as I was listening to him, and
pledging him the silence which I would have kept even without the hope
of being thought in exchange intelligent and magnanimous, I was looking
at Mme de Cambremer. And I had difficulty recognizing the melting,
toothsome article whose company I had enjoyed the other day at teatime,
on the terrace in Balbec, in the Normandy _galette_ I saw now, hard as a
pebble, into which the faithful would have tried to sink their teeth in
vain. Irritated in advance by the easy-going side that her husband had
got from his mother, and which meant that he would assume an honoured
expression when the faithful were being introduced to him, but anxious
all the same to fulfil her functions as a woman of the world, once
Brichot had been presented to her she wanted him to make the
acquaintance of her husband, as she had seen the more elegant of her
woman friends doing, but fury or pride prevailing over the flaunting of
her savoir-vivre, she said, not as she should have done, ‘Allow me to
introduce my husband,’ but ‘Meet my husband,’ so keeping the flag of the
Cambremers flying high, in spite of themselves, for the Marquis bowed as
low in front of Brichot as she had anticipated. But Mme de Cambremer’s
whole mood changed suddenly when she noticed M. de Charlus, whom she
knew by sight. Never had she succeeded in getting herself introduced to
him, even in the days of the liaison she had had with Swann. For M. de
Charlus, who always took the woman’s side, of his sister-in-law against
M. de Guermantes’s mistresses, of Odette, at that time not yet married,
but an old liaison of Swann’s, against the new ones, was a stern
defender of morality and a loyal protector of married couples, and had
given Odette – and kept – his word that he would not allow himself to be
presented to Mme de Cambremer. The latter had certainly never suspected
that it was at the Verdurins’ that she would finally meet this
unapproachable man. M. de Cambremer knew that it was so great a delight
to her that he was himself affected, and he looked at his wife with an
expression that signified: ‘You’re glad you decided to come, aren’t
you?’ He spoke as it happens very little, knowing that he had married a
superior woman. ‘Me, unworthy,’ he was forever saying, readily quoting a
fable of La Fontaine’s and another by Florian⁷⁶ which he saw as applying
to his own ignorance, and as enabling him, on the other hand, under the
guise of a disdainful flattery, to demonstrate to the men of learning
who were not members of the Jockey Club that one could both be a
sportsman and have read fables. The unfortunate thing was that he only
really knew two. Thus these recurred frequently. Mme de Cambremer was
not stupid but she had various very irritating habits. In her case, the
deformation of people’s names had absolutely nothing of aristocratic
disdain about it. She would not have said, unlike the Duchesse de
Guermantes (whose birth should have shielded her, more so than Mme de
Cambremer, against such an absurdity), so as to appear not to know the
far from fashionable name (whereas it is now that of one of the least
approachable of women) of Julien de Monchâteau: ‘a little Madame… Pico
de la Mirandola’.⁷⁷ No, when Mme de Cambremer got a name wrong it was
out of kindness, so as to appear not to know something, and when, out of
sincerity, she all the same admitted it, she thought she could hide it
by removing the name-tag. If she was defending a woman, for example, she
would seek to disguise the fact, while wanting not to lie to someone who
was begging her to tell the truth, that Madame Such-and-Such was
currently the mistress of M. Sylvain Lévy, and would say: ‘No… I know
nothing whatsoever about her, I believe she’s been criticized for having
kindled a passion in some gentleman whose name I don’t know, something
like Cahn, Kohn, Kuhn; anyway, I believe that this gentleman has long
since died and that there was never anything between them.’ The
procedure is similar – though the reverse of theirs – to that of those
liars who, by editing their activities when recounting them to a
mistress or simply to a friend, imagine that neither one nor the other
will at once see that the sentence spoken (as in the case of Cahn, Kohn,
Kuhn) is an interpolation, is of another species from those making up
the conversation, that it has a false bottom.

Mme Verdurin asked in her husband’s ear: ‘Do I give my arm to the Baron
de Charlus? Since you’ll have Mme de Cambremer on your right, we could
have swapped courtesies. – No, said M. Verdurin, as the other is higher
in rank (meaning that M. de Cambremer was a Marquis), M. de Charlus is
in fact his inferior. – Very well, I’ll put him next to the Princesse.’
And Mme Verdurin introduced Mme Sherbatoff to M. de Charlus; the pair of
them bowed silently, as much as to say they knew all about one another
but promised to keep a mutual secret. M. Verdurin introduced me to M. de
Cambremer. Even before he had spoken, in his loud voice with its slight
stammer, his tall stature and high colour had displayed in their
oscillation the martial hesitation of a superior officer who tries to
put you at your ease and says: ‘They’ve had a word with me, we’ll sort
things out; I’ll get your punishment lifted; we’re not man-eaters; it’ll
all be all right.’ Then, shaking my hand: ‘I believe you know my
mother,’ he said. The verb ‘believe’ he thought appropriate to the
wariness of a first introduction but in no way to express doubt, for he
went on: ‘Anyway, I have a letter from her for you.’ M. de Cambremer was
artlessly happy to revisit the place where he had lived for so long. ‘I
am rediscovering myself,’ he said to Mme Verdurin, as his wondering gaze
recognized the painted flowers on the trumeaux above the doors, and the
marble busts on their tall pedestals. He may, however, have felt
disoriented, for Mme Verdurin had brought in any amount of fine old
things that she owned. From which point of view, Mme Verdurin, though
regarded by the Cambremers as having turned everything upside down, was
not a revolutionary but intelligently conservative, in a sense which
they could not understand. Thus they accused her, wrongly, of hating the
old house and of dishonouring it with simple fabrics in place of their
own opulent plush, like an ignorant _curé_ criticizing the diocesan
architect for reinstating the old wooden carvings that had been stored
away, for which the cleric had seen fit to substitute ornaments bought
in the place Saint-Sulpice.⁷⁸ What was more, in front of the château, a
small mixed garden had started to replace the flower-beds that had been
the pride and joy not only of the Cambremers but of their gardener. The
latter, who looked on the Cambremers as his sole masters, and groaned
beneath the yoke of the Verdurins, as if the land had been temporarily
occupied by an invader and a troop of marauding soldiery, went off
secretly bearing his grievances to the dispossessed owner, waxed
indignant at the contempt in which his araucarias, his begonias, his
sempervivums and his double dahlias were held, and that anyone should
dare, in so opulent a residence, to grow such commonplace flowers as
anthemis or maidenhair fern. Mme Verdurin had sensed this stubborn
resistance and had decided, should she take a long lease or even buy La
Raspelière, to set as a condition the dismissal of the gardener, to whom
the old owner was, on the contrary, exceedingly attached. He had served
her for nothing in times of hardship, and adored her; but thanks to the
bizarre compartmentalization of opinion among the common people, where
the profoundest moral contempt may be enclosed within the most heartfelt
esteem, the which in its turn overlaps with old, unended grudges, he
often used to say about Mme de Cambremer, who, in ’70, in a château she
owned in the east, surprised by the invasion, had had, for a whole
month, to endure the contact of the Germans: ‘What Madame la Marquise’s
been much criticized for is, during the war, to have taken the Prussian
side and even put them up in her house. At any other time, I’d have
understood; but in time of war, she shouldn’t have done. It’s not
right.’ So that he was undyingly loyal to her, revered her for her
kindness, yet credited that she had been guilty of treason. Mme Verdurin
was piqued that M. de Cambremer should claim to recognize La Raspelière
so easily. ‘You must find a few changes all the same, she replied. First
of all, there were those terrible great Barbedienne bronzes⁷⁹ and some
nasty little plush chairs that I wasted no time packing off to the
attic, which is still too good for them.’ After which acerbic rejoinder
directed at M. de Cambremer, she offered him her arm to go to the table.
He hesitated for a moment, saying to himself: ‘All the same, I can’t go
in ahead of M. de Charlus.’ But imagining that the latter was an old
friend of the household, seeing that he did not have the place of
honour, he decided to take the arm he was being offered and told Mme
Verdurin how proud he was to have been admitted into the _cénacle_
(which is how he referred to the little nucleus, not without a short
laugh of satisfaction at knowing the term). Cottard, who was sitting
next to M. de Charlus, looked at him underneath his eyeglass so as to
make his acquaintance and break the ice, with winks that were far more
insistent than they would once have been, and not diluted by any
shyness. His winning glances, magnified by their smile, were no longer
contained by the eyepiece but overflowed it on every side. The Baron,
who was quick to find men of his own kind wherever he was, did not doubt
that Cottard was one such and was giving him the eye. He at once
displayed to the Professor the severity of the invert, as contemptuous
of those who feel attracted by him as he is all ardour and attentiveness
towards those for whom he feels an attraction. Although everyone talks,
untruthfully, of the comforts, forever denied to us by fate, of being
loved, it is no doubt a general law, whose writ is very far from running
to the Charluses alone, that we should find the person whom we do not
love but who loves us unbearable. To such a person, to the woman of whom
we will say not that she loves us but that she has her hooks into us, we
prefer the company of any other woman at all, who has neither her charm,
nor her attractions, nor her brains. She will only get these back so far
as we are concerned once she has ceased loving us. In which sense, we
might see, in the irritation produced in an invert by a man he finds
unattractive but who seeks him out, simply the transposition, in a
comical form, of this universal rule. With him, however, it is far more
powerful. Thus, whereas the common run of men try to conceal it even as
they experience it, the invert is implacable in letting the man who has
provoked it know, as he would certainly not let a woman know, M. de
Charlus, for example, with the Princesse de Guermantes, whose passion
annoyed yet flattered him. But when they find another man displaying a
particular proclivity towards them, then, whether it be incomprehension
that it should be the same as their own, or an unfortunate reminder that
this proclivity, found beautiful by them for as long as it is they who
are experiencing it, is looked on as a vice, or a desire to rehabilitate
themselves by an outburst in circumstances where it will not cost them
anything, or out of a fear of detection which they suddenly rediscover
when desire is no longer leading them on, blindfold, from one rash act
to the next, or in fury at suffering, by virtue of someone else’s
equivocal attitude, the injury they would not have shrunk from causing
that other person by their own attitude had they found him attractive,
the men who are not embarrassed to follow a young man for miles on end,
or never to take their eyes off him at the theatre even if he is with
friends, thereby risking causing a rift between them, they can be heard
to say, the minute someone for whom they feel no attraction looks at
them: ‘Who do you take me for, Monsieur? (simply because they are being
taken for what they are), I don’t understand you, no, no good insisting,
you’re making a mistake’, going as far as a slap in the face if
necessary, and, in front of someone who knows the rash individual in
question, becoming indignant: ‘What, you know this horror? The way it
has of looking at one! Such manners!’ M. de Charlus did not go as far as
this, but he assumed the frosty, offended expression that women who are
not loose have when people appear to think that they are, and even more
the women who are so. Moreover, the invert brought face to face with an
invert sees not simply a displeasing image of himself which, purely
inanimate, could injure only his self-esteem, but another himself,
alive, active in the same direction, and capable therefore of injuring
him in his amours. Thus he is following his instinct for
self-preservation when he runs this potential rival down, either to the
people who are capable of doing the latter harm (without Invert No i
concerning himself about being taken for a liar when thus condemning
Invert No 2 in the eyes of people who may be well informed about his own
case), or to the young man whom he has ‘started’, who is going perhaps
to be taken away from him and who needs to be convinced that the same
things that he would find every advantage in doing with him would be the
greatest of misfortunes were he to allow himself to do them with the
other. For M. de Charlus, mindful perhaps of the (quite imaginary)
dangers that the presence of this Cottard, whose smile he had
misinterpreted, would incur for Morel, an invert who did not attract him
was not merely a caricature of himself, he was also a rival designate.
If, when setting foot in the provincial town where he has come to settle
permanently, a tradesman in an unusual line of business sees directly
facing him, in the same square, the same business being carried on by a
competitor, he is not any more discomfited than a Charlus who, having
gone off to conduct his love-life privately in some tranquil spot,
catches sight, on the day of his arrival, of the local squire, or the
barber, whose appearance and mannerisms leave him in no doubt. The
tradesman will often develop a hatred for his competitor; this hatred
sometimes degenerates into melancholy, and if his heredity be even
slightly tainted, the tradesman in small towns has been known to show
the first signs of insanity, which can be cured only by persuading him
to sell his ‘good-will’ and expatriate himself. The fury of the invert
is more obsessional still. He has realized from the very first instant
that the squire and the barber have desired his young companion. It is
no good his repeating to the latter a hundred times a day that the
barber and the squire are ruffians any contact with whom would dishonour
him, he is obliged, like Harpagon,⁸⁰ to watch over his treasure and gets
up during the night to see whether it is being stolen from him. Which is
what no doubt, more even than desire or the convenience of a common
habit, and almost as much as that experience of ourselves which is alone
true, makes one invert able to sniff out another with an almost
infallible rapidity and certainty. He may be momentarily mistaken, but
is quickly able to redivine the truth. Thus M. de Charlus’s error was
short-lived. A godlike discernment showed him a moment later that
Cottard was not of his own kind and that he had no need to fear his
advances, either for himself, which would merely have exasperated him,
or for Morel, which would have seemed to him more serious. He recovered
his composure, and since he was still under the influence of the transit
of Venus Androgyne, he smiled feebly now and again at the Verdurins
without taking the trouble to open his mouth, but simply uncreasing one
corner of his lips, and for a second allowed his eyes to light up
affectionately, he who was so besotted with virility, just as his
sister-in-law the Duchesse de Guermantes would have done. ‘Do you do
much hunting, Monsieur? Mme Verdurin said contemptuously to M. de
Cambremer. – Has Ski told you about our great adventure? Cottard asked
the Patronne. – I hunt mainly in the forest of Chantepie, answered M. de
Cambremer. – No, I haven’t told her anything, said Ski. – Does it
deserve its name?’⁸¹ Brichot asked M. de Cambremer, having glanced at me
out of the corner of his eye, for he had promised to talk etymologies,
while asking me to keep from the Cambremers the contempt with which
those of the _curé_ had filled him. ‘It’s no doubt because I’m incapable
of understanding, but I don’t follow your question, said M. de
Cambremer. – I mean, do many magpies sing there?’ answered Brichot.
Cottard meanwhile was suffering from the fact that Mme Verdurin was not
aware that they had all but missed the train. ‘Come on now, said Mme
Cottard to her husband, in order to encourage him, recount your odyssey.
– Yes indeed, it’s quite out of the ordinary, said the Doctor, who
recommenced his narrative. When I saw that the train was in the station
I was thunderstruck. And all by the fault of Ski. You’re somewhat quaint
with your information, _mon cher_! And with Brichot waiting for us at
the station – I thought, said the university man, casting what remained
of his gaze around him and smiling with his thin lips, that if you had
been delayed at Graincourt, it was because you had encountered some lady
of the peripatetic school. – Hold your tongue, will you? Supposing my
wife were to hear you! said the Professor. The little woman, he jealous.
– Oh, that Brichot,’ exclaimed Ski, whose traditional gaiety had been
aroused by Brichot’s risqué joke, ‘ever the same,’ although he did not
know truth to tell whether the university man had ever been
dirty-minded. And in order to add the ritual gesture to these hallowed
words, he made as if he were unable to resist the urge to pinch his leg.
‘Quite a lad, he never changes,’ Ski went on, and, not reflecting on how
sad and how comic the academic’s semi-blindness made the words seem, he
added: ‘Ever one eye on the ladies. – There, you see, said M. de
Cambremer, that’s what it’s like when you encounter a scholar. I’ve been
hunting in the forest of Chantepie these past fifteen years and not once
did I ask myself what the name might mean.’ Mme de Cambremer cast a
stern glance at her husband; she would not have wanted him to humble
himself like this in front of Brichot. She was even more displeased
when, each time Cancan employed a ‘ready-made’ expression, Cottard, who
knew both their strengths and their weaknesses, having learned them so
laboriously, demonstrated to the Marquis, who had owned to being stupid,
that they did not mean anything: ‘Why “dull as ditchwater”? Do you think
ditchwater is duller than anything else? You say “forty winks”. Why
forty particularly? Why “sleep like a log”? Why “go west”? Why “paint
the town red”?’ But then Brichot undertook to defend M. de Cambremer, by
explaining the origins of each expression. But Mme de Cambremer was
chiefly occupied in examining the changes the Verdurins had brought
about at La Raspelière, so as to be able to criticize some of these and
to import others, or the same ones perhaps, into Féterne. ‘I ask myself
what that chandelier is that’s all askew. I have difficulty recognizing
my old Raspelière,’ she added, with a familiarly aristocratic air, as
though she had been speaking of a retainer, and claiming less to be
denoting his age than saying that he had seen her born. And as she was
somewhat bookish in her language: ‘All the same, she added, in an
undertone, I fancy that, were I to live in someone else’s house, I’d be
rather ashamed to alter everything like this. – It’s unfortunate you
didn’t come with them,’ said Mme Verdurin to M. de Charlus and Morel,
hoping that M. de Charlus would ‘be back’ and would yield to the rule of
all arriving by the same train. ‘You’re sure Chantepie means the magpie
that sings, Chochotte?’ she added, to demonstrate that, great hostess
that she was, she took part in all the conversations at once. ‘Tell me a
little bit about this violinist, Mme de Cambremer said to me, he
interests me; I adore music, and I fancy I’ve heard speak of him, you
must educate me.’ She had found out that Morel had come with M. de
Charlus and wanted, by getting the first to come, to try and make a
friend of the second. She added, however, so that I might not guess this
reason: ‘M. Brichot, too, interests me.’ For though she was highly
cultivated, just as certain people predisposed to obesity eat hardly
anything and walk all day long without ceasing visibly to put on weight,
so, for all that Mme de Cambremer had delved more deeply, at Féterne
especially, into an increasingly esoteric philosophy and an increasingly
learned kind of music, she emerged from these studies only to contrive
schemes that might enable her to ‘drop’ the bourgeois friendships of her
young days and form relationships that she had thought at first were
part of her in-laws’ society but which she had then realized were
situated much higher up and much further off. A philosopher who was not
sufficiently modern for her, Leibnitz, has said that the journey from
the intellect to the heart is a long one. Mme de Cambremer had proved no
more up to making it than her brother. Stopping from reading Stuart Mill
only to start reading Lachelier,⁸² the less she came to believe in the
reality of the external world, the greater the zeal with which she tried
to create a position for herself in it before she died. Besotted as she
was with realism in art, no object seemed to her humble enough to serve
as the painter or the writer’s model. A society picture or novel she
would have found nauseating; Tolstoy’s muzhiks, or Millet’s peasants,⁸³
were the absolute limit, socially speaking, which she would not allow
the artist to go beyond. Yet to overstep that which limited her own
social dealings, to ascend to associating with duchesses, was the aim of
all her endeavours, so ineffective was the spiritual discipline to which
she subjected herself through the study of masterpieces against the
morbid and congenital snobbery that had grown up in her. This last had
in the end cured certain tendencies towards avarice and adultery to
which she had been liable when young, in which it resembled those
singular and permanent pathological states that appear to immunize those
afflicted by them against other diseases. Listening to her, I could not
for the rest help but acknowledge, without deriving any pleasure from
it, the refinement of her expressions. They were those common, in any
given period, to everyone of the same intellectual calibre, so that the
refined expression at once supplies an arc of the circle as it were, the
means of describing and limiting the whole circumference. Thus these
expressions mean that the people who employ them at once annoy me, as
being already familiar, yet also pass for being superior, and were often
held out to me as delightful and unappreciated neighbours. ‘You are not
unaware, Madame, that many forest regions derive their names from the
animals that populate them. Next to the forest of Chantepie, you have
the woods of Chantereine. – I don’t know who the queen in question is,⁸⁴
but you’re not being very gallant to her, said M. de Cambremer. – Take
that! Chochotte, said Mme Verdurin. Apart from which, did you have a
good journey? – We encountered only vague specimens of humanity, who
filled the train. But I must answer M. de Cambremer’s question; the
_reine_ here isn’t a queen, the wife of a king, but a frog. It’s the
name it kept for a long time in these parts, witness the station of
Renneville, which ought to be written as Reineville. – You seem to have
a fine beast there,’ said M. de Cambremer to Mme Verdurin, pointing to a
fish. This was one of the compliments with the help of which he thought
he could pay his way at a dinner-party, and already return the courtesy.
(‘There’s no point in inviting them, he would often say to his wife,
referring to one or other lot of friends. They were delighted to have
us. It was they who thanked me.’) ‘Anyway, I have to tell you that I’ve
been going just about every day to Renneville for many years, and I’ve
not seen any more frogs there than elsewhere. Mme de Cambremer brought
the _curé_ of a parish where she owns a lot of property here, who’s of
the same way of thinking as yourself, I fancy. He’s written a book. – He
has indeed, I read it with the utmost interest,’ answered Brichot,
hypocritically. The satisfaction that his vanity received indirectly
from this answer brought a long laugh from M. de Cambremer. ‘Ah, well,
the author of, how shall I put it, this geography, this glossary, holds
forth at length on the name of a small locality of which we were once,
if I may say so, the lords, by the name of Pont-à-Couleuvre. Now I’m
obviously just a common ignoramus compared with that fount of learning,
but I’ve been to Pont-à-Couleuvre scores of times to his once, and I’ll
be damned if I’ve ever seen ever one of those nasty serpents,⁸⁵ I say
nasty, despite the praise the good La Fontaine bestows on them (‘The Man
and the Snake’ was one of his two fables.) – You’ve not seen any, and
it’s you who has seen aright, replied Brichot. True, the writer you
speak of knows his subject backwards, he’s written a remarkable book. –
Indeed! burst out Mme Verdurin, that book, it’s right to say, is a true
labour of love. – No doubt he consulted a few terriers (meaning by that
the lists of benefices and cures for each parish), which may have
supplied him with the names of the lay patrons and ecclesiastical
collators. But there are other sources. One of my most learned friends
has drawn on them. He found that the same place was given the name of
Pont-à-Quileuvre. This bizarre name inspired him to go further back
still, to a Latin text where the bridge that your friend believes to be
infested with snakes is given as _Pons cui aperit_. A closed bridge
opened only on payment of a fair toll. – You talk of frogs. Finding
myself in the midst of such learned people, I have the impression of
being the frog before the Areopagus’ (this was the second fable),⁸⁶ said
Cancan, who made this joke frequently, laughing loudly, thinking by
means of it, in his humility and very aptly, at once to profess his
ignorance and make a display of his learning. As for Cottard, blocked by
the silence of M. de Charlus and searching for air in other directions,
he turned to me and put one of those questions which impressed his
patients if he had guessed right and thus shown that he was, so to
speak, inside their bodies; and if, on the contrary, he had guessed
wrong, enabled him to rectify certain theories and broaden his former
points of view. ‘When you come to these relatively elevated situations,
such as that where we find ourselves in at this moment, have you noticed
whether it increases your tendency to breathless attacks?’ he asked me,
certain either of making me admire him, or else of completing his
education. M. de Cambremer heard the question and smiled. ‘I can’t tell
you how much it amuses me to hear you have breathless attacks,’ he threw
at me across the table. By which he did not mean that it cheered him up,
although that was in fact the case. For this excellent man could not
hear speak of another’s misfortune without a sense of well-being and a
spasm of hilarity which quickly made way for the compassion of a kind
heart. But his words had another meaning, made clear by those that
followed: ‘It amuses me, he said, because in fact my sister does, too.’
In short, it amused him as if he had heard me naming as one of my
friends someone who had been a frequent visitor to their house. ‘What a
small world,’ was the reflection that he formulated to himself and which
I saw written on his smiling face when Cottard mentioned my breathless
attacks. And, starting with that dinner-party, these became like a sort
of common link, for news of which M. de Cambremer never failed to ask
me, if only in order to pass it on to his sister.

Even as I replied to the questions his wife put to me concerning Morel,
I was thinking about a conversation I had had with my mother during the
afternoon. As, while not advising me against going to the Verdurins’ if
it might amuse me, she was reminding me that it was a milieu that would
not have appealed to my grandfather but would have made him shout ‘Turn
out the guard!’, my mother had added: ‘Listen, President Toureuil and
his wife told me they had had lunch with Mme Bontemps. I wasn’t asked
anything. But I thought I gathered that a marriage between you and
Albertine would be her aunt’s dearest wish. I think the real reason is
they all find you very sympathetic. At the same time, I fancy the luxury
they think you would be able to give her, the connections they more or
less know we have, all that’s not unconnected with it, I fancy, though
secondary. I wouldn’t have mentioned it to you, because I’m not keen on
it, but as I imagine people will bring it up, I preferred to forestall
them. – But you, what do you think of her? I had asked my mother. – Me?
_I_ shan’t be marrying her. You could certainly do a thousand times
better where marriage is concerned. But I don’t think your grandmother
would have liked you to be influenced. At present, I can’t tell you what
I think of Albertine, I don’t think of her. I shall say to you, like Mme
de Sévigné, “She has good qualities, or so I believe. But at the start,
I am able to praise her only with negatives. She is not this, she does
not have a Rennes accent. In time I shall perhaps say, she is that.”⁸⁷
And I shall always think well of her if she is to make you happy.’ But
by these same words, which put the decision concerning my happiness back
into my own hands, my mother had plunged me into that state of doubt in
which I had been already when, my father having given me permission to
go to _Phèdre_, and above all to become a man of letters, I had suddenly
felt too heavy a responsibility, the fear of upsetting him, and the
melancholy that comes when we cease to obey orders which, day by day,
hide the future from us, and realize that we have at last begun to live
life in earnest, as a grown-up person, to live the one life of which
each of us is free to dispose.

It would be best perhaps to wait a little, to begin by seeing Albertine
as in the past, so as to try and find out whether I truly loved her. I
could amuse her by bringing her to the Verdurins’, and that reminded me
that I had come there myself this evening only in order to discover
whether Mme Putbus was staying there, or would be coming. She was not
dining at all events. ‘Apropos of your friend Saint-Loup,’ Mme de
Cambremer said to me, thus making use of an expression that indicated a
greater logic in her thoughts than her words might have given one to
suppose, for though she had been talking to me about music, her mind had
been on the Guermantes, ‘you know everyone’s talking about his marriage
with the Princesse de Guermantes’s niece. I must tell you that for my
own part, I don’t give _a fig_ for all this social tittle-tattle.’ I was
seized by a fear of having spoken unsympathetically in front of Robert
about a girl whose originality was false and whose mind was as
second-rate as her character was violent. There is almost no piece of
news that we learn which does not cause us to regret some remark of
ours. I replied to Mme de Cambremer, what was in any case the truth,
that I knew nothing about it, and that anyway his fiancée had struck me
as still very young. ‘That’s perhaps the reason why it’s not yet
official; it’s on everyone’s lips, at all events. – I prefer to warn
you,’ said Mme Verdurin curtly to Mme de Cambremer, having heard that
the latter had been talking to me about Morel and thought, when she
dropped her voice to talk about Saint-Loup’s engagement, that she was
still talking about him. ‘What we make here isn’t light music. It’s
frightening how progressive they are, you know, in matters of art, my
Wednesday faithful, my children as I call them, she added, with a look
of vainglorious terror. I sometimes say to them: “My dear good people,
you’re marching faster than your Patronne, not that audacity was ever
thought to frighten her.” Every year, they go a bit further; I can see
the day coming when they’ll no longer march for Wagner or for d’Indy. –
But it’s very good being progressive, we’re never progressive enough,’
said Mme de Cambremer, while inspecting every corner of the dining-room,
seeking to identify the things her mother-in-law had left behind, and
those that Mme Verdurin had brought in, and to catch the latter
red-handed in her lack of good taste. Meanwhile, she was trying to talk
to me on the subject that interested her most, M. de Charlus. She found
it touching that he should have a violinist for a protégé. ‘He looks to
be intelligent. – Extremely full of life even, for a man who’s already
getting on, I said. – Getting on? But he doesn’t look as though he’s
getting on, see, his hair’s still yellow.’ (For the last three or four
years, the normal word for ‘hair’, _les cheveux_, had been used in the
singular, _le cheveu_, by one of those unknown launchers of literary
fashions, and everyone on the same radius as Mme de Cambremer said _le
cheveu_, not without an affected smile. At the present moment, people
are still saying _le cheveu_, but out of a surfeit of the singular, the
plural will be reborn.) ‘What mainly interests me in M. de Charlus, she
added, is that you can sense the gift in him. I must tell you that I lay
little store by knowledge. What is learned doesn’t interest me.’ These
words are not at variance with the particular virtue of Mme de
Cambremer, which was indeed imitative, and acquired. But one of the
things that you needed to know at that particular moment was that
knowledge is nothing, is not worth a straw compared with originality.
Mme de Cambremer had learned, like everyone else, that one must never
learn anything. ‘That’s the reason why Brichot, she said to me, who has
his intriguing side, for I don’t turn up my nose at a certain appetizing
erudition, interests me much less.’ But Brichot, at that moment, had
only one preoccupation: hearing that they were talking music, he was
fearful lest the subject remind Mme Verdurin of the death of Dechambre.
He wanted to say something that would dismiss that fateful memory. M. de
Cambremer gave him the opportunity with this question: ‘Wooded places
are always named after animals, then? – Not so,’ replied Brichot, happy
to deploy his knowledge in front of so many newcomers, among whom, as I
had told him, he was sure to interest at least one. ‘You only need to
see how, in the names of people themselves, a tree is preserved, like a
fern in a lump of coal. One of our conscript fathers⁸⁸ is called M. de
Saulces de Freycinet, which, if I’m not mistaken, signifies a place
planted with willows and ash, _salix et fraxinetum_; his nephew, M. de
Selves, unites even more trees, since his name is de Selves, _sylva_.’⁸⁹
Saniette was delighted to find the conversation taking so animated a
turn. He was able, since Brichot was talking the whole time, to observe
a silence that would avoid his becoming the target of M. and Mme
Verdurin’s gibes. And having become more susceptible still in his joy at
being rescued, he had been touched to hear M. Verdurin, for all the
solemnity of such a dinner-party, telling the _maître d’hôtel_ to set a
jug of water beside M. Saniette, who drank nothing else. (The generals
who get the most soldiers killed insist that they be well fed.) And then
at one moment Mme Verdurin had smiled at Saniette. No question about it,
they were good people. He would never again be tortured. At that moment
the meal was interrupted by a guest whom I have forgotten to mention, an
illustrious Norwegian philosopher who spoke French very well but very
slowly, for the twofold reason, first that having only recently learned
it and wishing not to make mistakes (he made a few all the same), he
referred for each word to a sort of internal dictionary; and then
because, as a metaphysician, he was always thinking about what he meant
as he was saying it, which, even in a Frenchman, is a cause of slowness.
He was for the rest a delightful creature, though similar in appearance
to many others, except in one respect. This man who was so slow of
speech (there was a silence between each word) became vertiginously
quick to make his escape the moment he had said his farewells. His
precipitateness gave you to suppose, the first time, that he had a
stomach-ache or some even more pressing need.

‘My dear… associate,’ he said to Brichot, having deliberated to himself
whether ‘associate’ was the appropriate term, ‘I have a sort of… desire
to know whether there are other trees in the… nomenclature of your
beautiful… French… Latin… Norman… language. Madame (he meant Mme
Verdurin although he did not dare look at her) has told me that you know
everything. Is this not the precise moment? – No, it’s the moment to
eat,’ broke in Mme Verdurin, who could see the dinner never being over.
‘Ah, very well!’ replied the Scandinavian, lowering his head to his
plate, with a sad smile of resignation. ‘But I must point out to Madame
that if I ventured on this questionnaire… I’m sorry, this questation…
it’s because tomorrow I must return to Paris to dine at the Tour
d’Argent or at the Hôtel Meurice.⁹⁰ My French… colleague… M. Boutroux,⁹¹
is to talk to us there about the spiritualist séances… I’m sorry, the
spirituous evocations… that he has supervised. – It’s not as good as
they make out, the Tour d’Argent, said Mme Verdurin in irritation. I’ve
even had some detestable dinners there. – But am I mistaken, or is the
food that one eats at Madame’s not the very finest French cuisine? –
Good heavens, it’s not positively bad, said Mme Verdurin, mollified. And
if you come next Wednesday, it’ll be better. – But I leave on Monday for
Algiers, and from there I am going to the Cape. And once I’m at the Cape
of Good Hope, I shan’t be able to meet my illustrious associate any
more… Forgive me, I shan’t be able to meet my colleague any more.’ And
having supplied these retrospective excuses, he began obediently to eat
at breakneck speed. But Brichot was only too happy to be able to provide
further vegetable etymologies and he replied, so interesting the
Norwegian that the latter stopped eating once again, but indicating that
they could take away his full plate and move on to the next course: ‘One
of the Forty,⁹² said Brichot, has the name Houssaye, or a place planted
with _houx_ or holly; in the name of a subtle diplomatist, d’Ormesson,
you find _orme_, or elm, the _ulmus_ beloved of Virgil and which gave
its name to the town of Ulm; in that of his colleagues, M. de la
Boulaye, the _bouleau_ or birch; M. d’Aunay, the _aulne_ or alder; M. de
Bussière, the _buis_ or box; M. Albaret, the _albier_ or alburnum (I
promised myself I would tell Céleste that); M. de Cholet, the _chou_ or
cabbage; and the _pommier_ or apple tree in the name of M. de la
Pommeraye, whom we heard lecture, Saniette, d’you remember, in the days
when the good Porel had been sent off to the other end of the earth, as
proconsul in Odéonia?’⁹³ Hearing Brichot pronounce the name of Saniette,
M. Verdurin cast an ironic glance at his wife and at Cottard which
unnerved that self-conscious man. ‘You were saying that Cholet comes
from _chou_, I said to Brichot. Does a station that I went through
before getting to Doncières, Saint-Frichoux, also come from _chou_? –
No, Saint-Frichoux is _Sanctus Fructuosus_, just as _Sanctus Ferreolus_
gave Saint-Fargeau, but it’s not Norman at all. – He knows evelything
there is to be known, he’s borling us,’ gurgled the Princesse quietly. –
There are so many other names that interest me, but I can’t ask you
everything at once.’ And turning to Cottard: ‘Is Mme Putbus here? I
asked him. – No, thank God, replied Mme Verdurin, who had overheard my
question. I tried hard to divert her holidays to Venice, we’re rid of
her for this year. – I shall myself have a right to two trees, said M.
de Charlus, for I’ve more or less taken a small house between
Saint-Martin-du-Chêne and Saint-Pierre-des-Ifs.⁹⁴ – But that’s very near
here, I hope you’ll come over often, together with Charlie Morel. You’ll
only need to make arrangements concerning the trains with our little
group, you’re no distance from Doncières,’ said Mme Verdurin, who hated
people not coming by the same train and at the times when she had sent
carriages. She knew how severe the climb was up to La Raspelière, even
going round by the network of small roads behind Féterne, which delayed
you by half an hour, and she was afraid that those looking to be
independent might not find carriages to bring them, or might even,
having in actual fact remained at home, seize on the pretext of not
having found one at Douville-Féterne and not having felt up to making
such an ascent on foot. In response to this invitation, M. de Charlus
contented himself with a mute nod of the head. ‘He can’t always be so
accommodating, he looks so stiff,’ whispered the Doctor to Ski, having
remained very simple despite the superficial coating of vanity, and who
did not try to hide the fact that Charlus had snubbed him. ‘He’s no
doubt unaware that in all the watering-places and even in Paris in the
clinics, the doctors, for whom I am of course ‘number one’, make it a
point of honour to introduce me to all the noblemen who are there and
are afraid of hearing the worst. That even makes staying in a resort
rather agreeable for me, he added off-handedly. Even in Doncières the
major of the regiment, who is the doctor in attendance on the colonel,
invited me to have lunch with him, telling me I was in a position to
dine with the general. And this general is a Monsieur _de_ something. I
don’t know whether his titles of nobility are more or less ancient than
those of the Baron here. – Don’t get all excited, it’s not much of a
coronet,’ replied Ski in an undertone, and he added something indistinct
with a verb, of which I could make out the final syllables ‘_arder_’,⁹⁵
preoccupied as I was with listening to what Brichot was saying to M. de
Charlus. ‘No, I regret to tell you, it’s probable you have only one
tree, for if Saint-Martin-du-Chêne is obviously _Sanctus Martinus juxta
quercum_, the word _if_ conversely may simply be the root, _ave, eve_,
which means damp, as in Aveyron, Lodève, Yvette, and which you see
surviving in our _éviers_, or kitchen-sinks. It’s the “_eau_”, the
water, which in Breton is _Ster, Stermaria, Sterlaer, Sterbouest,
Ster-en-Dreuchen_.’ I did not hear the conclusion, for whatever pleasure
I might have taken in hearing the name of _Stermaria_ once again, I
could not help hearing Cottard, near to whom I was sitting, saying in a
low voice to Ski: ‘Ah, but I didn’t know! He’s a gentleman who knows how
to manage things, then. What, he’s one of the brotherhood! Yet he hasn’t
got those puffy eyelids. I shall need to watch out for my feet
underneath the table, he’d only have to squeeze one so far as I’m
concerned. Anyway, it only half surprises me. I see several noblemen in
the shower, in the altogether, they’re degenerates more or less. I don’t
speak to them because after all I’m a public servant and it might do me
harm. But they know perfectly well who I am.’ Saniette, who had been
alarmed by Brichot’s interpellation, was beginning to breathe freely
again, like someone who is afraid of storms but finds that the flash of
lightning has not been followed by any sound of thunder, when he heard
M. Verdurin question him while fixing him with a stare that did not
leave hold of the poor wretch all the time he was speaking, in such a
way as instantly to intimidate him and not allow him to gather his wits.
‘But you’ve always kept it from us, Saniette, that you used to frequent
matinées at the Odéon?’ Trembling like a recruit in front of a bullying
sergeant, Saniette answered, making his words occupy the smallest
possible space so as to have a better chance of avoiding the blows:
‘Once, to _La Chercheuse_.⁹⁶ – What’s that he says?’ shouted M.
Verdurin, looking both disgusted and furious, and knitting his brows, as
though his full attention would not be enough if he was to understand
something unintelligible. ‘For a start, we don’t understand what you’re
saying, what have you got in your mouth?’ demanded M. Verdurin with
increasing violence, and alluding to Saniette’s faulty pronunciation.
‘Poor Saniette, I won’t have you making him unhappy,’ said Mme Verdurin
in a falsely pitying tone and so as to leave no one in any doubt as to
her husband’s insolent intentions. ‘I went to _La Che… – Che, che, che_,
do try to speak clearly, said M. Verdurin, I can’t even hear you.’
Hardly one of the faithful could forbear from guffawing, and they looked
like a band of cannibals whose taste for blood has been reawakened by a
wound inflicted on a white man. For the instinct for imitation and lack
of courage govern societies as they do crowds. And everyone laughs at
someone who is seen being made fun of, while being quite prepared to
venerate him ten years later in a circle where he is admired. It is in
this same fashion that the common people drive out or acclaim a king.
‘Come, it’s not his fault, said Mme Verdurin. – It’s not mine either,
you don’t dine out if you can no longer articulate. – I was at Favart’s
_La Chercheuse d’esprit_. – What, it’s La Chercheuse d’esprit that you
call _La Chercheuse_? Oh, that’s magnificent, I could have gone on
looking for a hundred years and not found that,’ exclaimed M. Verdurin,
who would, however, have decided straight off that someone was not well
read or an artist, ‘was not one of us’, if he had heard him give certain
works their full title. You had, for example, to say _Le Malade, Le
Bourgeois_; and anyone adding ‘_imaginaire_’ or ‘_gentilhomme_’ would
have made it clear they were not ‘of the club’, just as in a salon
someone proves that he is not a member of society by saying M. de
Montesquiou-Fezensac instead of M. de Montesquiou. ‘But it’s not so
extraordinary,’ said Saniette, breathless with emotion yet smiling,
though he may not have wanted to. Mme Verdurin burst out: ‘Oh yes it is!
she sniggered. You can be sure that no one in the world could have
guessed you meant _La Chercheuse d’esprit_.’ M. Verdurin resumed more
quietly, and addressing both Brichot and Saniette: ‘It’s a jolly play as
it happens, _La Chercheuse d’esprit_.’ Uttered in a serious tone, these
simple words, in which no trace of malice was to be detected, did
Saniette as much good and evoked as much gratitude in him as a kindness.
He was unable to proffer a single word but maintained a contented
silence. Brichot was more talkative. ‘That’s true, he replied to M.
Verdurin, and were it to be passed off as the work of some Sarmatian or
Scandinavian author, _La Chercheuse d’esprit_ might be proposed as a
candidate for the situation vacant of masterpiece. But let it be said
without disrespect to the shade of the gentle Favart, his temperament
was not that of an Ibsen. (He at once blushed up to the ears remembering
the Norwegian philosopher, who wore an unhappy look because he had been
trying in vain to identify what vegetable substance the _buis_ might be
that Brichot had mentioned just now in connection with Bussière.)
Anyway, Porel’s satrapy now being occupied by a functionary who is a
Tolstoyan of the strict observance, maybe we shall be seeing _Anna
Karenina_ or _Resurrection_ beneath the Odéonian architrave.⁹⁷ – I know
the portrait of Favart you mean, said M. de Charlus. I saw a very good
proof engraving of it at the Comtesse Molé’s.’ The name of the Comtesse
Molé had a powerful effect on Mme Verdurin. ‘Ah, so you go to Mme de
Molé’s,’ she exclaimed. She thought that you said ‘the Comtesse Molé’ or
‘Madame Molé’ simply as an abbreviation, as she had heard people say
‘the Rohans’, or out of disdain, as she herself said ‘Madame La
Tremoïlle’. She was in no doubt that the Comtesse Molé, knowing as she
did the Queen of Greece and the Princesse de Caprarola, had as good a
right to the _particule_ as anybody, and she had decided for once to
grant it to this very brilliant person who had shown herself so
well-disposed towards her. And so, to make quite clear that she had
spoken as she had deliberately, and did not begrudge the Comtesse the
_de_, she went on: ‘But I had no idea you knew Madame de Molé!’ as if it
had been doubly extraordinary both that M. de Charlus should have known
that lady and that Mme Verdurin should not have known that he knew her.
Now society, or at least what M. de Charlus called by that name, forms a
relatively homogeneous and closed whole. Just as it is understandable
that in the disparate vastness of the bourgeoisie a barrister should say
to someone who knows one of his schoolfriends, ‘But how the devil did
you come to meet so-and-so?’, to be surprised on the other hand that a
Frenchman should know the meaning of the word _temple_ or _forêt_ would
be hardly any more extraordinary than to wonder by what accident M. de
Charlus had been brought together with the Comtesse Molé. Moreover, even
had such an acquaintance not followed naturally from the laws of
society, if it had been fortuitous, how could it have been strange that
Mme Verdurin should not know of it when she was meeting M. de Charlus
for the first time, and his connection with Mme Molé was far from the
only thing she did not know in relation to a man of whom, in truth, she
knew nothing? ‘Who was in that _Chercheuse d’esprit_, my dear Saniette?’
asked M. Verdurin. Although feeling that the storm had passed, the
former archivist hesitated before answering: ‘There now, said Mme
Verdurin, you’re intimidating him, you make fun of everything he says
and then you want him to respond. Come on, say who was in it, and we’ll
give you some galantine to take home,’ said Mme Verdurin, making unkind
allusion to the ruination Saniette had brought down on himself in trying
to save a married couple with whom he was friends. ‘I only remember that
it was Mme Samary who played La Zerbine, said Saniette. – La Zerbine?
What on earth’s that? cried M. Verdurin, as though the house were on
fire. – It’s a stock role in the old repertoire, see _Le Capitaine
Fracasse_,⁹⁸ as you might say the Braggart or the Pedant. – Ah, it’s you
who’s the pedant. La Zerbine! No, but he’s off his head,’ exclaimed M.
Verdurin. Mme Verdurin looked at her guests and laughed, as if to excuse
Saniette. ‘La Zerbine, he imagines everyone knows instantly what that
means. You’re like M. de Longepierre, the stupidest man I know, who said
to us familiarly the other day “the Banat”. Nobody knew what he was
talking about. Finally we found out it was a province in Serbia.’ To put
an end to Saniette’s ordeal, which was causing me more pain than it was
him, I asked Brichot if he knew what Balbec meant. ‘Balbec is probably a
corruption of Dalbec, he told me. One would need to be able to consult
the charters of the Kings of England, the suzerains of Normandy, because
Balbec was a dependency of the barony of Dover, on which account it was
often known as Balbec d’Outremer or Balbec-en-Terre. But the barony of
Dover itself came under the bishopric of Bayeux, and despite the rights
held momentarily over the Abbey by the Templars, starting with Louis
d’Harcourt, the Patriarch of Jerusalem and Bishop of Bayeux, it was the
bishops of that diocese who were collators of the benefice of Balbec.
That’s how the Dean of Doville explained it to me, a bald, eloquent,
fanciful man and a gourmet, who lives in the obedience of
Brillat-Savarin and expounded some dubious pedagogy to me in ever so
slightly sybilline terms while making me eat some admirable _pommes
frites_.’⁹⁹ While Brichot was smiling, to show how witty it was to
associate such disparate matters and to employ an ironically elevated
language on down-to-earth matters, Saniette was looking to introduce
some shaft of wit that might set him back on his feet after his collapse
of a moment before. The shaft of wit was what used to be known as an
_à-peu-près_,¹⁰⁰ or pun, but which had changed its form because plays on
words evolve as do literary genres, or epidemics, which vanish only to
be replaced by others, and so on. In the old days, the form the
_à-peu-prés_ took was that of ‘the last word’. But this was out of date,
no one any longer used it, it was only Cottard now who might sometimes
say in the middle of a game of piquet: ‘Do you know the last word in
absent-mindedness? Believing that the Édit de Nantes was an
Englishwoman.’¹⁰¹ Last words had been replaced by nicknames. Basically,
it was still the old _à-peu-prés_, but because the nickname was in vogue
people failed to notice. Unfortunately for Saniette, when these
_à-peu-près_ were not his own, and generally unfamiliar to the little
nucleus, he came out with them so self-consciously that, despite the
laugh by which he followed them in order to signal their humorous
nature, no one understood them. But if, conversely, the _bon mot_ was
his own, since he had generally hit upon it when talking with one of the
faithful, the latter had repeated it on taking possession of it and the
witticism was then known, but not as coming from Saniette. Thus, when he
slipped one of these in it was recognized, but because he was its
author, he was accused of plagiarism. ‘Now then, Brichot went on, _bec_
in Norman is stream; there is the Abbey of Bec; Mobec, the stream of the
marshland (_mor_ or _mer_ meant marsh, as in Morville, or in Bricquemar,
Alvimare, Cambremer); Briquebec, the stream of the height, coming from
_briga_, a fortified place, as in Bricqueville, Bricquebosc, Le Bric,
Briand, or else from _brice_, a bridge, which is the same as _Bruck_ in
German (Innsbruck) and in English _bridge_, which ends so many
place-names (Cambridge, etc.) You have a lot of other _becs_ in
Normandy: Caudebec, Bolbec, Le Robec, Le Bec-Hellouin, Becquerel. It’s
the Norman form of the Germanic _Bach_, Offenbach, Anspach. Varaguebec,
from the old word _varaigne_, the equivalent of _garenne_, a private
wood or pond. As for _dal_, Brichot went on, that’s a form of _Thal_, a
valley: Darnetal, Rosendal, and even, near Louviers, Becdal. The river
that lent its name to Balbec is charming as it happens. Seen from a
_falaise_ or cliff (_Fels_ in German, you even have, not far from here,
on a height, the pretty town of Falaise), it adjoins the spires of the
church, though in reality situated a long way off, and appears to be
reflecting them. – I can believe that, I said, it’s an effect Elstir is
very fond of. I’ve seen several sketches of it in his house. – Elstir!
You know Tiche? exclaimed Mme Verdurin. But you must know that he and I
were once really close. Thank heaven, I no longer see him. No, but ask
Cottard, or Brichot, he used to have his place laid at my table, he came
every day. And he’s one of whom it can be said it did him no good
leaving our little nucleus. In a moment I’ll show you some flowers he
painted for me; you’ll see the difference from what he’s doing nowadays,
which I don’t like at all, not at all! Why, I got him to paint Cottard’s
portrait, not counting everything that he did from me. – And he gave the
Professor mauve hair,’ said Mme Cottard, forgetting that at that stage
her husband was not even an _agrégé_.¹⁰² ‘I don’t know whether you find
that my husband has mauve hair, Monsieur. – That’s of no account,’ said
Mme Verdurin, lifting her chin with an expression of disdain for Mme
Cottard and admiration for the man of whom she had been speaking, ‘that
was the work of a famous colourist and a fine painter. Whereas, she
added, addressing herself once again to me, I don’t know whether you
call that painting, all those terrible great compositions, those great
contraptions he’s been exhibiting since he’s no longer been coming to
me. I call them daubs, they’re so trite, and then they lack any relief,
any personality. There’s a bit of everybody in them. – He is bringing
back the grace of the eighteenth century, but in a modern form, said
Saniette precipitately, invigorated and restored to the saddle by my
friendliness. But I prefer Helleu.¹⁰³ – There’s no connection with
Helleu, said Mme Verdurin. – But there is, it’s eighteenth-century
febrile. He’s a _Watteau à vapeur_,¹⁰⁴ and he started to laugh. – Oh,
heard it, heard it a hundred times, I’ve been having that served up to
me for years, said M. Verdurin, who had indeed once been told it by Ski,
though as his own creation. You’re out of luck when the one time you
pronounce something intelligibly, it isn’t your own. – It pains me, Mme
Verdurin went on, for he was someone of ability, he’s thrown away a fine
artistic temperament. Oh, if only he’d stayed here! He’d have become the
leading landscapist of the day. And it’s a woman who’s dragged him down
so! Not that that surprises me, for he was an attractive man, if vulgar.
Basically, a second-rater. I can tell you, I sensed that straight off.
All in all, he never interested me. I was very fond of him, that’s all.
For one thing, he was so dirty! Do you much care for that, people who
never wash? – What’s this thing we’re eating, of such a pretty shade?
asked Ski. – It’s called a strawberry mousse, said Mme Verdurin. – But
it’s ra-vish-ing. We ought to be opening bottles of Château-Margaux,
Château-Lafite, port. – I can’t tell you how amusing I find him, he only
drinks water,’ said Mme Verdurin, in order to disguise, beneath the
charm she found in this flight of fancy, the alarm occasioned in her by
such prodigality. ‘But not so as to drink them, Ski went on, you will
fill all our glasses with them, they’ll bring in wonderful peaches, huge
nectarines, there facing the setting sun; it’ll have the luxuriance of a
beautiful Veronese. – And cost almost as much, muttered M. Verdurin. –
But take away these cheeses of such a villainous shade,’ he said, trying
to remove the Patron’s plate, who defended his Gruyère with all his
might. ‘You can understand why I don’t miss Elstir, Mme Verdurin said to
me, this one has twice the talent. Elstir is hard work, the man who’s
incapable of letting go of his picture when he wants to. He’s the good
student, examination fodder. Ski on the other hand follows his fancy.
You’ll see him lighting his cigarette in the middle of dinner. – By the
way, I don’t know why you’ve refused to have his wife, said Cottard, it
would be like the old days then. – Watch what you’re saying, will you!
No prize tart enters my house, Monsieur le Professeur.’ said Mme
Verdurin, who had, on the contrary, done her very best to get Elstir to
return, even with his wife, but before they got married she had tried to
come between them, she had told Elstir that the woman he loved was
stupid, dirty, immoral and had stolen. For once, she had not succeeded
in bringing about a split. Instead, Elstir had broken with the Verdurin
salon; and he had congratulated himself on having done so, just as
converts bless the illness or the setback that has impelled their
withdrawal and set them on the road to salvation. ‘He’s splendid is the
Professor, she said. Why not say that my drawing-room is a house of
assignation. Anyone’d think you don’t know what Mme Elstir is like. I’d
rather entertain the lowest of street-girls! No, no, I’d rather starve.
I tell you in any case, I’d have been all the more stupid to overlook
the wife when the husband no longer interests me, it’s out of date, it’s
not even drawn any more. – That’s extraordinary for a man of such
intelligence, said Cottard. – Oh no, replied Mme Verdurin, even in the
days when he had talent, for he had that, the wretch, and to spare, what
was tiresome about him was that he wasn’t the least bit intelligent.’
Mme Verdurin had not waited for their quarrel, and no longer to like his
painting, to pass this verdict on Elstir. The fact was that, even in the
days when he formed part of the little group, Elstir would sometimes
spend entire days with some woman or other whom Mme Verdurin thought,
rightly or wrongly, was ‘bird-brained’, which in her view was not the
behaviour of an intelligent man. ‘No, she said, with an air of being
even-handed, I think his wife and he are just right for each other. God
knows, I know of no more boring creature anywhere on earth and I’d go
out of my mind if I had to pass two hours with her. But they say he
finds her very intelligent. You simply have to admit the fact, our
_Tiche_ was above all _excessively stupid_! I’ve seen him bowled over by
women you can’t imagine, by honest-to-God idiots we’d never have wanted
in our little clan. Well, he used to write to them, to argue with them!
Him, Elstir! Not that that stops him having his charming side, oh
charming, charming and delightfully absurd, of course.’ For Mme Verdurin
was convinced that truly remarkable men commit countless follies. A
false idea, yet with some truth in it. Certainly, people’s ‘follies’ are
unbearable. But a lack of balance that we discover only with time is a
consequence of the entry into a human brain of susceptibilities to which
it is not customarily suited. With the result that the oddities of
people that are charming exasperate us, but there are few if any
charming people who are not, in some way, odd. ‘Here, I’m going to be
able to show you his flowers right away,’ she said to me, seeing her
husband signalling to her that we could get up from the table. And she
took M. de Cambremer’s arm once again. As soon as he had left Mme de
Cambremer, M. Verdurin sought to make his apologies to M. de Charlus,
and give his reasons, mainly for the pleasure of discussing these social
nuances with a man of title, and momentarily the inferior of those who
had assigned him the place to which they adjudged he had a right. But
first of all he was anxious to demonstrate to M. de Charlus that he held
too high an opinion of him intellectually to suppose that he paid any
heed to such bagatelles: ‘Forgive me for mentioning these trifles, he
began, for I can well imagine the scant importance you attach to them.
Bourgeois minds may heed them, but the others, the artists, the ones
truly of our own kind, don’t give a damn. And I realized you were one of
us from the very first words we exchanged!’ M. de Charlus, who had
placed a very different interpretation on this expression, gave a sudden
start. Following the Doctor’s oglings, the Patron’s insulting frankness
made him choke. ‘Don’t protest, _cher_ Monsieur, you are one of us, it’s
as clear as day, M. Verdurin went on. Note that I do not know whether
you practise one or other art, but that isn’t necessary, nor is it
always sufficient. Dechambre, who has just died, played perfectly, with
the most robust technique, but he wasn’t one, you sensed straight away
he wasn’t. Brichot isn’t one. Morel is, my wife is, I sense that you
are. – What were you going to say to me?’ M. de Charlus broke in, who
was beginning to feel reassured as to M. Verdurin’s meaning, but would
rather he did not shout these ambiguous words from the rooftops. ‘We put
you only on the left,’ M. Verdurin replied. M. de Charlus, with a
good-natured, understanding, insolent smile, replied: ‘Oh come! That’s
of no account at all, _here_!’ And he gave a little laugh that was
peculiar to him, a laugh that had probably come down to him from some
Bavarian or Lorraine grandmother, who had herself got the identical
laugh from one of her forebears, so that it had been ringing out like
this, unchanged, for a good few centuries in the lesser courts of old
Europe, and its precious quality been being enjoyed, like that of
certain old musical instruments now grown very uncommon. There are times
when, in order to depict someone in their entirety, a phonetic imitation
would need to be added to the description, and that of the character
which M. de Charlus was playing risks incompleteness for want of this
little laugh, so delicate and so light, just as certain of Bach’s suites
are never rendered accurately because the orchestras lack the ‘little
trumpets’, with their particular tone, for which the composer wrote one
or other part. ‘But, explained M. Verdurin, wounded, it was on purpose.
I attach no importance at all to titles of nobility,’ he added with that
disdainful smile that I have seen so many people I have known, unlike my
grandmother and my mother, have for all the things they do not possess,
in front of people who will then, so they believe, be unable to use
these to establish their superiority over them. ‘But then, since M. de
Cambremer was in fact there and he’s a Marquis, and you’re only a Baron…
– Permit me, replied M. de Charlus with a haughty expression, to the
astonished M. Verdurin, I am also Duc de Brabant, Damoiseau de
Montargis, and Prince d’Oléron, de Carency, de Viareggio and des Dunes.
It’s of absolutely no importance, however. Do not torment yourself,’ he
went on, resuming his delicate smile, which grew broader at these final
words: ‘I could tell straight away that you weren’t in the habit of it.’

Mme Verdurin came up to show me Elstir’s flowers. If the act, long since
become a matter of such indifference to me, of dining out had, on the
contrary, in a form that had entirely revived it, of a journey along the
coast, followed by an ascent by carriage up to two hundred metres above
sea-level, produced a sort of intoxication, this last had not been
dispelled at La Raspelière. ‘Here, just look at that, the Patronne said
to me, pointing to some large and magnificent roses by Elstir, but whose
unctuous scarlet and frothy whiteness had boiled over with rather too
creamy a relief against the jardinière on which they had been placed.
D’you think he’d still have the touch to capture that? Is that not
pretty good? Besides, the subject matter’s so beautiful, it would be
amusing to finger them. I can’t tell you how amusing it was watching him
painting them. You felt it interested him, searching for that effect.’
And the Patronne’s gaze paused dreamily on this present from the artist,
in which was encapsulated, not only his great talent, but their long
friendship, which survived only in these mementoes of it that he had
left to her; behind the flowers once picked for her by him, she thought
she could once again see the beautiful hand which had painted them, in a
single morning, in their freshness, so that the ones on the table, and
the other leaning against a chair in the dining-room, had been able to
represent, for the Patronne’s lunch-party, a tête-à-tête between the
still living roses and the semi-likeness of their portrait. A
semi-likeness only, Elstir being able to see a flower only by first
transplanting it into that interior garden in which we are obliged
always to remain. In this watercolour he had shown the roses as they had
first appeared to him and which, but for him, we should never have
known; so that they could be said to be a new variety with which the
painter, like an ingenious horticulturist, had enriched the rose family.
‘From the day he left the little nucleus, the man was finished. It seems
that my dinner parties made him waste time, that I was harming the
development of his _genius_, she said, in an ironic tone. As if
associating with a woman such as myself could be anything but salutary
for an artist!’ she exclaimed in an impulse of vanity. Right beside us,
M. de Cambremer, who had already sat down, and seeing M. de Charlus
standing, made as if to get up and offer him his chair. This offer
corresponded in the Marquis’s mind perhaps simply to a vague intention
of being polite. M. de Charlus preferred to attach to it the
significance of a duty that a mere gentleman knew he must render to a
prince, and thought that there was no better way of establishing his
right to such precedence than by declining it. And so he exclaimed:
‘What’s this? I beg you! The idea!’ There was already something very
‘Guermantes’ about the astutely vehement tone of this protestation,
which was more strongly marked still in the imperious, useless and
familiar gesture with which M. de Charlus pressed down with both hands,
as if forcing him to be seated again, on the shoulders of M. de
Cambremer, who had not got up: ‘Oh, come now, my dear fellow, the Baron
insisted, that’d be all we need! There’s no reason! In our day we
reserve that for princes of the blood.’ The Cambremers were no more
moved than Mme Verdurin by my enthusiasm for their house. For I was
unresponsive to the beauties they pointed out to me but excited by my
confused reminiscences; now and again I even confessed to my
disappointment on finding that something did not conform to what its
name had given me to imagine. I made Mme Verdurin indignant by telling
her that I had thought it would be more countryfied. Conversely, I
paused in ecstasy to sniff the fragrance of the air coming through the
doorway. ‘I see you like draughts,’ they said. My praise of the piece of
green lustre stopping up a broken window-pane was no more successful:
‘But it’s horrible!’ exclaimed the Marquise. The last straw was when I
said: ‘My greatest joy was when I arrived. When I heard my footsteps
echoing along the gallery, I thought I’d entered the offices of some
village _mairie_ or other, where there’s a map of the canton.’ This
time, a determined Mme de Cambremer turned her back on me. ‘You didn’t
find it all too badly arranged? her husband asked her, with the same
pitying solicitude as if he were inquiring how well his wife had
withstood some unhappy ceremony. There are some good things.’ But since,
when the fixed rules of a sure taste do not impose inevitable limits on
it, malevolence finds fault with everything about the person or the
house of the people who have supplanted you: ‘Yes, but they’re not in
the right place. Indeed, are they all that good? – You’ll have noticed,
said M. de Cambremer, with a sadness restrained by a certain firmness,
some of the Jouy cretonne is showing through, things worn completely out
in this drawing-room! – And that piece of material with its big roses
like a peasant woman’s bedspread,’ said Mme de Cambremer, whose quite
spurious culture applied exclusively to idealist philosophy,
Impressionist painting and the music of Debussy. And so as not to make
her case solely in the name of luxury but also of good taste: ‘And
they’ve put up draught curtains! What a lack of style! But what d’you
expect, such people don’t know, where could they have learned? They must
be retired wholesalers. They’ve not done so badly considering. – I
thought the chandeliers were good,’ said the Marquis, without anyone
knowing why he should make an exception of the chandeliers, just as,
inevitably, each time a church was mentioned, whether it be Chartres
cathedral, or Rheims, or Amiens, or the church in Balbec, what he always
hastened to cite as admirable was ‘the organ-case, the pulpit and the
workmanship on the misericords’. ‘As for the garden, the less said the
better,’ said Mme de Cambremer. It’s been massacred. ‘The paths have
gone all skew-whiff!’

I took advantage of the fact that Mme Verdurin was serving the coffee to
go and take a look at the letter that M. de Cambremer had handed me, in
which his mother had invited me to dinner. In these few lines of ink,
the handwriting betrayed an individuality recognizable for me from now
on among all others, without there being any need to resort to the
hypothesis of special pens any more than rare pigments of mysterious
manufacture are necessary to the painter to express his original vision.
Even a paralytic, suffering from agraphia after a stroke, and reduced to
seeing the characters as a pattern without being able to read them,
would have realized that Mme de Cambremer belonged to an old family in
which the enthusiastic cultivation of literature and the arts had let
some air into its aristocratic traditions. He would also have guessed
around what age the Marquise had learned simultaneously to write and to
play Chopin. It was the epoch when people of breeding observed the rule
of being agreeable and the so-called rule of the three adjectives. Mme
de Cambremer combined the two. One laudatory adjective was not enough
for her, she would follow it (after a dash) by a second, then (after a
second dash) by a third. But what was peculiar to her is that, contrary
to the social and literary objective she had set herself, in Mme de
Cambremer’s letters the sequence of the three epithets wore the aspect,
not of a progression, but of a diminuendo. Mme de Cambremer told me in
this first letter that she had met Saint-Loup and had appreciated more
than ever his ‘unique – rare – real’ qualities, and that he was due to
return with one of his friends (the one indeed who was in love with the
daughter-in-law), and that if I cared to come, with or without them, to
dinner at Féterne, she would be ‘overjoyed – happy – pleased’. Perhaps
it was because the desire to be agreeable was not matched in her by any
fertility of imagination or richness of vocabulary that, keen to utter
three exclamations, this lady had the resources to provide in the second
and third only an enfeebled echo of the first. There need only have been
a fourth adjective for nothing to have remained of her initial
affability. Finally, out of a certain refined simplicity that can but
have created a considerable impression amongst her family and even the
circle of their connections, Mme de Cambremer had acquired the habit of
substituting for the word ‘_sincère_’, which might end by appearing
untruthful, the word ‘_vrai_’, or true. And to make quite clear that
something sincere was indeed involved, she broke the conventional
alliance that would have put _vrai_ in front of the substantive and set
it bravely down behind. Her letters would end with: ‘_Croyez à mon
amitié vraie_.’ ‘_Croyez à ma sympathie vraie_.’¹⁰⁵ Unfortunately, so
much had this become a formula that the affectation of candour gave a
stronger impression of a mendacious politeness than those ancient
formulas to whose meaning we no longer give a thought. My reading was
not helped in any case by the confused sound of conversations, dominated
by the raised voice of M. de Charlus, not having let the topic drop and
saying to M. de Cambremer: ‘By wanting me to take your place, you
reminded me of a gentleman who sent me a letter this morning addressed
“To His Highness the Baron de Charlus” and which began “Monseigneur” –
Indeed, your correspondent was exaggerating somewhat,’ replied M. de
Cambremer, giving way to a discreet merriment. M. de Charlus had
provoked it; he did not share in it. ‘But in actual fact, my dear
fellow, he said, you’ll observe that, heraldically speaking, it’s he who
is in the right; I’m not turning it into a personal matter, as you can
imagine. I speak of it as though it concerned someone else. But what
will you, history is history, there’s nothing we can do about it and
it’s not up to us to rewrite it. I shan’t cite the case of the Emperor
William, who in Kiel has never stopped Monseigneuring me. I’ve heard it
said that he called all French dukes that, which is improper, but is
perhaps simply a thoughtful gesture aimed above our heads, at France. –
Thoughtful and more or less sincere, said M. de Cambremer. – Oh, I’m not
of your opinion. Personally speaking, you’ll observe that a nobleman of
the lowest rank such as this Hohenzollern, a Protestant what’s more, and
who dispossessed my cousin the King of Hanover,¹⁰⁶ is unlikely to appeal
to me,’ added M. de Charlus, who seemed to take Hanover more closely to
heart than Alsace-Lorraine. ‘But I believe that the inclination the
Emperor bears towards us is deeply sincere. The imbeciles will tell you
that he’s a stage emperor. On the contrary, he’s wonderfully
intelligent. He knows nothing about painting, and he forced M.
Tschudi¹⁰⁷ to withdraw the Elstirs from the national collections. But
then Louis XIV didn’t like the Dutch masters, also had a liking for
ostentation, yet, when all’s said and done, was a great sovereign. And
then William II has armed his country from the military and naval points
of view, as Louis XIV did not, and I trust that his reign will never
experience the reverses that darkened the end of the reign of the man
tritely referred to as the Sun-King. The Republic committed a grave
error in my view in spurning the Hohenzollern’s civilities, or in
returning them in driblets. He himself is very conscious of this and
says, with that gift for expression that he has: “What I am looking for
is a handshake, not a sweep of the hat.” As a man, he is despicable; he
has abandoned, betrayed, reneged on his best friends in circumstances in
which his silence was as wretched as theirs was magnificent,’ continued
M. de Charlus, who, borne off down the slope, was slithering towards the
Eulenburg Affair,¹⁰⁸ and recalled the remark made to him by one of the
highest placed of those inculpated: “What confidence the Emperor must
have in our tact to have dared to permit such a trial! But then he was
not wrong to have put his trust in our discretion. We’d have kept our
mouths shut even on the scaffold.” Anyway, all this has nothing to do
with what I meant to say, namely that, in Germany, as mediatized princes
we are _Durchlaucht_,¹⁰⁹ and that in France our rank of Highness was
publicly recognized. Saint-Simon claims we acquired it improperly, in
which he is completely mistaken. The reason he gives, namely that Louis
XIV had us forbidden to call him the Most Christian King, and ordered us
to call him the King and nothing more, merely proves that we were
answerable to him and not at all that we did not have the rank of
Prince. Otherwise, he would have had to deny it to the Duc de Lorraine
and a great many others! As it happens, several of our titles come from
the House of Lorraine through Thérèse d’Espinoy, my great-grandmother,
who was the daughter of the Damoiseau de Commercy.’ Having noticed that
Morel was listening to him, M. de Charlus went into the reasons for his
pretension more fully. ‘I have pointed out to my brother that the entry
on our family ought to be found, not in the third section of the _Gotha_
but in the second, not to say in the first,’ he said, not realizing that
Morel did not know what the _Gotha_ was. ‘But that’s his affair, he’s my
_chef d’armes_ and so long as he finds it right the way it is and lets
the matter rest, I have only to close my eyes. – M. Brichot interested
me greatly,’ I said to Mme Verdurin, who had come up to me, as I was
putting Mme de Cambremer’s letter into my pocket. ‘A good man and with a
cultivated mind, she answered coldly. He obviously lacks originality and
taste, and has a terrible memory. It used to be said of the
“forefathers” of the people we have here this evening, the _émigrés_,¹¹⁰
that they had forgotten nothing. But at least they had the excuse, she
said, taking over a _bon mot_ of Swann’s, of never having learned
anything. Whereas Brichot knows everything and hurls piles of
dictionaries at our heads during dinner. I imagine you now know
everything there is to be known about what the name of this or that town
or village means.’ As Mme Verdurin was speaking, I was thinking that I
had promised myself to ask her something, but I could not remember what
it was. ‘I’m sure you’re talking about Brichot, said Ski. Chantepie,
Freycinet, eh what, he spared you nothing. I had my eye on you, _ma
petite_ Patronne. – I saw you indeed, I nearly exploded.’ I would not be
able to say today how Mme Verdurin was dressed on that particular
evening. I had no better idea at the time perhaps, for I am not
observant by nature. But sensing that her toilette was not without its
pretensions, I said something friendly or even admiring to her. She was
like almost all women, who imagine that the compliment they receive is a
strict expression of the truth, that it is a judgment passed
impartially, irresistibly, as though it applied to an art object
unconnected with a particular individual. And so it was with a
seriousness which made me blush at my own hypocrisy that she put the
vain and artless question customary in such circumstances: ‘You like it?
– You’re talking about Chantepie, I’m sure,’ said M. Verdurin coming up
to us. I had been alone, with my mind on my green lustrine and a smell
of wood, in not noticing that, as he enumerated his etymologies, Brichot
was being laughed at. And since the impressions that for me gave things
their value were of the kind that other people either do not experience
or else suppress unthinkingly as insignificant, so that in consequence,
had I been able to communicate them, they would have remained
misunderstood or would have been scorned, they were quite unserviceable
and had the additional drawback of making me appear stupid in the eyes
of Mme Verdurin, who could see that I had ‘swallowed’ Brichot, as I had
already seemed stupid to Mme de Guermantes because I had enjoyed myself
at Mme d’Arpajon’s. However, where Brichot was concerned, there was
another reason. I was not one of the little clan. And in every clan, be
it social, political or literary, they develop a perverse capacity for
discovering in a conversation, an official speech, an item of news, a
sonnet, all that the straightforward reader would never have dreamed of
finding there. How many times has it not happened that, reading with a
certain emotion a tale artfully spun by a wordy and somewhat antiquated
Academician, I have been on the point of saying to Bloch, or to Mme de
Guermantes, ‘It’s very jolly!’, when, before I had opened my mouth, they
would exclaim, each in a different language: ‘If you want to have a
moment’s enjoyment, read a short story by so-and-so. Human stupidity has
never gone so far.’ Bloch’s contempt derived above all from the fact
that certain, as it happens agreeable, effects of style were somewhat
jejune; that of Mme de Guermantes from the fact that the story seemed to
prove the exact reverse of what the author had intended, for factual
reasons that she was ingenious enough to deduce but of which I would
never have thought. I was as surprised to find the irony that lay
concealed behind the apparent amiability of the Verdurins towards
Brichot as to hear, a few days later at Féterne, the Cambremers say to
me, faced by the enthusiastic praises I was bestowing on La Raspelière:
‘You can’t possibly mean it, after what they’ve done there.’ It is true
they admitted that the dinner service was good. I had not noticed it,
any more than the scandalous draught-curtains. ‘So now, when you go back
to Balbec, you’ll know what Balbec signifies,’ said M. Verdurin,
ironically. It was indeed the things that Brichot had taught me which
interested me. As for what they called his wit, it was exactly the same
as that which had once been so much enjoyed among the little clan. He
spoke with the same irritating facility, but his words no longer
carried, had to overcome a hostile silence or disagreeable echoes; what
had changed was, not what he trotted out, but the acoustics of the
drawing-room and the attitude of mind of the audience. ‘Careful!’ said
Mme Verdurin in an undertone, pointing to Brichot. The latter, having
kept his hearing, more acute than his eyesight, cast at the Patronne a
myopic philosopher’s glance, soon averted. If his eyes were not so good,
those of his mind in return took a broader view of things. He had seen
how little was to be expected from human affection, and had resigned
himself to the fact. Admittedly, it pained him. It happens that even the
man who, on the same evening, in a circle where he is accustomed to
please, guesses that he has been found too frivolous, or too pedantic,
or too clumsy, or too cavalier, and so on, returns home unhappy. Often
it is over a matter of opinion, or a system, that he has appeared absurd
to others or passé. Often he knows perfectly well that these others are
his inferiors. He would have no difficulty dissecting the sophisms with
the aid of which they have tacitly condemned him, he wants to go and
visit someone, or to write a letter; wiser to do nothing, but wait for
the following week’s invitation. Sometimes also, instead of ending in a
single evening, these falls from favour last for months. They further
increase the instability of social judgments to which they are
attributable. For the man who knows that Mme X despises him, feeling
himself to be appreciated at Mme Y’s, declares her to be much superior
and emigrates to her salon. This, however, is not the place to depict
the men who are above the life of society but have not been able to
realize themselves outside of it, glad to be received, embittered by
being misunderstood, and discovering year by year the flaws in the
hostess they had been idolizing, and the genius of the one whose true
worth they had not appreciated, only to return to their first love once
they have endured the disadvantages that the second love had also, and
once those of the first have been somewhat forgotten. From these brief
falls from favour you can judge of the unhappiness produced in Brichot
by one that he knew was final. He was not unaware that Mme Verdurin
sometimes made fun of him in public, of his infirmities even, and
although knowing how little was to be expected of human affection,
having accepted that, he still looked on the Patronne as his best
friend. But from the flush that covered the university man’s face, Mme
Verdurin realized that he had heard her and promised herself she would
be kind to him in the course of the evening. I could not help saying to
her that she had not been at all so to Saniette. ‘What, not nice! But he
adores us, you don’t know how much we mean to him! My husband is a
little irritated at times by his stupidity, and you have to admit, with
good reason, but why at such times doesn’t he bridle up more, instead of
wearing that hangdog expression? It’s not being open. I don’t like that.
That’s not to say I don’t always try to calm my husband down, because,
if he went too far, Saniette would only have not to come back; and I
wouldn’t want that because I can tell you he’s penniless, he needs his
dinners. But then, after all, if he takes offence, if he doesn’t come
back, that’s no concern of mine, when you have need of other people you
try not to be so idiotic. – The dukedom of Aumale was in our family for
a long time before entering the House of France, M. de Charlus was
explaining to M. de Cambremer, in front of an open-mouthed Morel, for
whom this whole discourse was, if not addressed to him, intended. We
took precedence over all the foreign princes; I could cite you a hundred
examples. When, at the burial of Monsieur,¹¹¹ the Princesse de Croy
attempted to kneel after my great-great-grandmother, the latter pointed
out to her in no uncertain terms that she had no right to the cushion,
had it removed by the officer on duty and took the matter to the King,
who ordered Mme de Croy to go to Mme de Guermantes’s and make her
apologies. The Duc de Bourgogne having come to us with the ushers, with
their rods of office raised, we obtained the King’s consent to have them
lowered. I know it’s bad form to speak of the virtues of one’s own
kinsfolk. But it’s well known that ours were always to the fore in times
of danger. Our battle cry, once we had given up that of the Ducs de
Brabant, was “_Passavant_”.¹¹² So that all in all it was quite
legitimate that the right everywhere to be first to which we had laid
claim during all those centuries in war we should then have obtained at
Court. And it’s always been recognized there, I can assure you. For
further proof, I shall cite the Princesse de Baden. She having so far
forgotten herself as to try to dispute her rank with that same Duchesse
de Guermantes of whom I spoke just now, and having sought to go in ahead
of her to the King by taking advantage of a momentary hesitation on my
kinswoman’s part (although there was no need for one), the King quickly
called out, “Enter, cousin, enter, Madame de Baden knows all too well
what is due to you.” And it was as Duchesse de Guermantes that she held
that rank, even though she was well enough born in her own right, since
through her mother she was niece to the Queen of Poland, the Queen of
Hungary, the Elector Palatine, the Prince de Savoie-Carignan and the
Prince of Hanover, later King of England.¹¹³ – _Maecenas atavis edite
regibus_!¹¹⁴ said Brichot, addressing M. de Charlus, who responded to
this compliment with a slight nod of the head. – What were you saying?
Mme Verdurin asked Brichot, with whom she would have liked to try and
make amends for her words of a little earlier. – I was referring, may
God forgive me, to a dandy who was the ornament of the upper crust (Mme
Verdurin gave a frown) in roughly speaking the century of Augustus (Mme
Verdurin, reassured by the remoteness of this ‘upper crust’, adopted a
more serene expression), to a friend of Virgil and Horace, who carried
their toadying to the point of acclaiming his more than aristocratic,
his royal, ascendancy to his face, in short I was referring to Maecenas,
to a bookworm who was the friend of Horace, of Virgil and of Augustus.
I’m sure M. de Charlus knows very well, in every respect, who Maecenas
was.’ Looking graciously at Mme Verdurin out of the corner of his eye,
because he had heard her arranging a rendezvous with Morel in two days’
time, and was afraid of not being invited: ‘I fancy, said M. de Charlus,
that Maecenas was something like the Verdurin of the Ancient World.’ Mme
Verdurin could only half suppress a smile of satisfaction. She went up
to Morel. ‘He’s agreeable, your parents’ friend, she said. You can tell
he’s an educated man, well bred. He’ll do well in our little nucleus.
Where does he live in Paris?’ Morel maintained a haughty silence and
simply asked to play a game of cards. Mme Verdurin first demanded
something on the violin. To general astonishment, M. de Charlus, who
never spoke of the great gifts he possessed, accompanied, in the purest
style, the last part (uneasy, tormented, Schumannesque, though in fact
earlier than the Franck sonata) of Fauré’s sonata for piano and
violin.¹¹⁵ I felt that he would give Morel, wonderfully gifted where
tone and virtuosity were concerned, precisely what he lacked, culture
and style. But I reflected with curiosity on what unites a physical
taint and a spiritual gift within the same man. M. de Charlus was not
very different from his brother, the Duc de Guermantes. He had even, a
moment or two earlier (which was rare with him), spoken in equally bad
French. Berating me (no doubt so that I might speak warmly about Morel
to Mme Verdurin) for never going to see him, and I having pleaded
discretion, he had replied: ‘But since it’s I who am asking you, it’s
only I who _might’ve taken umbrage_.’ It could have been the Duc de
Guermantes speaking. M. de Charlus was in sum only a Guermantes. But it
was enough that nature should have thrown his nervous system out of
balance sufficiently for him to prefer, instead of a woman, as his
brother the Duc would have done, one of Virgil’s shepherds or Plato’s
pupils, and qualities foreign to the Duc de Guermantes but often linked
with this imbalance, had turned M. de Charlus into a delightful pianist,
an amateur painter who did not lack taste and an eloquent talker. Who
could have divined that the quick, anxious, charming style in which M.
de Charlus had played the Schumannesque passage from Fauré’s sonata had
its correlation in – I do not dare say, was caused by – the purely
physical elements of M. de Charlus, in the defectiveness of his nerves?
We shall explain the term ‘defectiveness of his nerves’ later on, and
the reasons why a Greek from the time of Socrates, or a Roman from the
time of Augustus, could be what we know they were while remaining
absolutely normal men, and not men-women such as we see today. In
addition to a real aptitude for the arts, never brought to fruition, M.
de Charlus had, far more than the Duc, loved their mother, and loved his
wife, and even years later, when people spoke of them, tears would come,
but superficial tears, like the perspiration of an overweight man, whose
brow is beaded with sweat at the least exertion. With the difference
that to the latter people say, ‘You’re overheated!’ whereas they pretend
not to notice other people’s tears. They, that is to say, society; for
the common people are concerned by seeing someone cry, as if a sob were
more serious than a haemorrhage. His sadness following the death of his
wife did not, thanks to his habit of lying, debar M. de Charlus from a
way of life that was out of keeping. Later on, he stooped so low as to
let it be understood that, during the funeral ceremony, he had found a
means of asking the altar-boy for his name and address. And this may
have been true.

The piece having finished, I took the liberty of demanding some Franck,
which seemed to cause Mme de Cambremer so much pain that I did not
insist. ‘You can’t like that,’ she said. She asked instead for Debussy’s
_Fêtes_,¹¹⁶ which brought cries of ‘Oh, it’s sublime!’ from the very
first note. But Morel realized that he knew only the opening bars and
out of a sense of mischief, without any intention of mystifying, he
began a march by Meyerbeer. Unfortunately, as he left few transitions
and made no announcement, everyone thought it was still Debussy, and
they went on calling out ‘Sublime!’ By revealing that the composer was
that not of _Pelléas_ but of _Robert le Diable_,¹¹⁷ Morel cast a certain
chill. Mme de Cambremer scarcely had time to experience it for her own
part, as she had just come upon a book of Scarlatti¹¹⁸ and had flung
herself on it with the impulsiveness of a hysteric. ‘Oh, play this,
look, this, it’s divine,’ she cried. And yet what, in her fever of
impatience, she had selected from that long-despised composer, recently
promoted to the highest honours, was one of those accursed pieces that
have so often stopped you from sleeping and which a merciless learner
begins over and over again on the floor adjoining yours. But Morel was
done with music and, since he insisted on playing cards, M. de Charlus,
in order to take part, wanted whist. ‘He told the Patron just now he was
a Prince, Ski said to Mme Verdurin, but that’s not true, his family’s
bourgeois merely, of minor architects. – I want to know what you were
saying about Maecenas. It amuses me, so there!’ Mme Verdurin repeated to
Brichot, out of an amiability that went to the latter’s head. To shine
in the eyes of the Patronne, therefore, and perhaps in my own: ‘Well
truth to tell, Madame, Maecenas interests me mainly because he was the
first apostle of note of that Chinese god who numbers more sectaries
today in France than Brahma, than Christ himself, the almighty god
Je-Men-Fou.’¹¹⁹ Mme Verdurin was no longer content in such cases to sink
her face into her hands. She descended with the abruptness of the
insects known as mayflies on the Princesse Sherbatoff; if the latter was
within range, the Patronne would clutch at the Princesse’s armpit,
digging in her nails, and hide her head there for a moment or two like a
child playing hide-and-seek. Masked by this protective screen, she was
presumed to be laughing until the tears came but was as likely to be
thinking of nothing at all as those people who, while reciting a
somewhat lengthy prayer, take the sensible precaution of burying their
face in their hands. Mme Verdurin imitated them when listening to
Beethoven quartets, at once to show that she regarded these as a prayer
and not to let it be seen that she was asleep. ‘I speak in all
seriousness, Madame, said Brichot. Too many in number I think are the
people today who spend their time contemplating their navel as if it
were the centre of the universe. As sound doctrine, I raise no objection
to some nirvana or other that tends to dissolve us into the Great All
(which, like Munich and Oxford, is much closer to Paris than Asnières or
Bois-Colombes),¹²⁰ but it is not the mark of a good Frenchman, or even
of a good European, when the Japanese are perhaps at the gates of our
Byzantium, that collectivized anti-militarists should be solemnly
debating the cardinal virtues of free verse.’ Mme Verdurin thought she
could now let go of the Princesse’s bruised shoulder and she allowed her
face to reappear, not without pretending to wipe her eyes and to catch
her breath two or three times. But Brichot wanted that I should share in
the feast, and having remembered, from the _soutenances de thèses_¹²¹
over which he presided so incomparably, that there is no better way of
flattering the young than by taking them to task, by granting them some
importance and getting them to treat you as a reactionary: ‘I wouldn’t
want to blaspheme against the Gods of Youth, he said, casting at me one
of those furtive glances which an orator accords on the sly to someone
present in the audience whom he has mentioned by name. I wouldn’t want
to be damned as a heretic or a backslider in the Mallarméan chapel, in
which our new friend, like all those of his age, will have served at the
esoteric Mass, as an altar-boy at least, and proved himself a
deliquescent or a Rosicrucian.¹²² But really, we’ve seen too many of
these intellectuals worshipping Art with a capital A and who, when
taking to the bottle with Zola is no longer enough, inject Verlaine into
their veins. Having become etheromanes in their devotion to Baudelaire,
they’d no longer be capable of the manly effort their homeland may some
day demand from them, anaesthetized as they are by the great literary
neurosis in the hot, enervating atmosphere, heavy with the unwholesome
effluvia from an opium-den symbolism.’ Unable to feign even the faintest
admiration for Brichot’s motley and inept declamation, I turned away
towards Ski and assured him that he was entirely mistaken as to the
family to which M. de Charlus belonged; he replied that he was sure of
his facts and added that I had even told him that his real name was
Gandin, Le Gandin. ‘I told you, I replied, that Mme de Cambremer was the
sister of an engineer, M. Legrandin. I’ve never mentioned M. de Charlus.
He and Mme de Cambremer are about as closely connected by birth as the
Great Condé¹²³ and Racine. – Oh, I thought they were,’ said Ski
offhandedly, no more apologizing for his mistake than a few hours
earlier for that which had almost caused us to miss the train. ‘Are you
planning to stay long on the coast?’ Mme Verdurin asked M. de Charlus,
whom she could foresee being one of the faithful and was fearful of
seeing him return too soon to Paris. ‘Good Lord, one never knows,
replied M. de Charlus in a nasal drawl. I should like to stay until the
end of September. – You’re right, said Mme Verdurin, that’s when we get
the good storms. – To be perfectly truthful, that’s not what would
decide me. For some time I’ve been too neglectful of the archangel St
Michael, my patron, and I would like to make amends by remaining until
his feast-day, the 29th of September, at the Abbaye du Mont.¹²⁴ – Does
that sort of thing much interest you?’ asked Mme Verdurin, who might
perhaps have managed to suppress the injury to her anti-clericalism had
she not been afraid that so lengthy an excursion might lead to the
violinist and the Baron ‘defaulting’ for forty-eight hours. ‘You are
perhaps afflicted by an intermittent deafness, replied M. de Charlus
insolently. I have told you that St Michael was one of my glorious
patrons.’ Then, smiling in a benevolent ecstasy, his eyes fixed on the
distance, and his voice swelling with an exaltation that seemed to me
more than aesthetic, but religious: ‘It’s so fine at the Offertory, when
Michael stands beside the altar, in a white robe, swinging a gold censer
and with such a mass of perfumes that the fragrance of them rises all
the way up to God! – We might go as a group, suggested Mme Verdurin, for
all her horror of the cassock. – At that moment, from the Offertory,’ M.
de Charlus went on, who, for different reasons but in the same manner as
the good orators in the Chamber, never responded to an interruption but
pretended not to have heard it, ‘it would be gorgeous to see our young
friend Palestrina-ing or even performing an aria by Bach. He would be
wild with joy, the good Abbé also, and it’s the greatest homage, the
greatest public homage at any rate, that I can render to my patron. So
very edifying for the faithful! We will discuss it in a little while
with the young musical Angelico, a soldier, like St Michael.’

Called on to be dummy, Saniette declared that he did not know how to
play whist. And Cottard, noticing that there was not now long to go
before the time of the train, at once started on a game of _écarté_ with
Morel. M. Verdurin, furious, marched on Saniette wearing a terrible
expression: ‘You don’t know how to play anything then!’ he shouted,
furious at having lost an opportunity for a game of whist, but overjoyed
at finding one for insulting the former archivist. The latter,
terror-stricken, adopted a humorous expression: ‘Yes I do, I know how to
play the piano,’ he said. Cottard and Morel had sat down facing one
another. ‘Your honour, said Cottard. – Suppose we move a bit closer to
the table, M. de Charlus said to M. de Cambremer, worried at seeing the
violinist with Cottard. It’s as interesting as those questions of
etiquette which, in our own day, no longer much signify. The only kings
left to us, in France at any rate, are the ones in a pack of
playing-cards, and I fancy there are kings galore in our young
virtuoso’s hand,’ he soon added, out of an admiration for Morel that
even extended to the way he played cards, to flatter him also, and
indeed to justify the movement he was making, of leaning over the
violinist’s shoulder. ‘Me terrump you,’ said Cottard, putting on his
vulgar rich foreigner’s voice, whose children used to burst out
laughing, as did his students and the _chef de clinique_, when, even at
the bedside of a seriously ill patient, the Master, wearing the
expressionless mask of an epileptic, came out with one of his customary
jests. ‘I don’t quite know what I ought to play, said Morel, consulting
M. de Cambremer. – As you like, you’ll be beaten either way, this one or
that one, it matters not, _c’est égal_. – Égal… Galli-Marié?¹²⁵ said the
Doctor, sliding a kindly and insinuating glance in the direction of M.
de Cambremer. She was what we call a true diva, a dream, a Carmen such
as we shan’t see again. The role was made for her. I liked hearing
Ingalli-Marié¹²⁶ in it, too.’ The Marquis stood up with the contemptuous
vulgarity of the well-born, who do not realize that they are insulting
their host by appearing not to be sure whether their guests are be
associated with, and who take the English custom as their excuse for
employing a disdainful expression: ‘Who is that gentleman playing cards?
What’s his occupation in life? What does he _sell_? I rather like to
know who I find myself with, so as not to become intimate with just
anyone at all. But I didn’t catch his name when you did me the honour of
introducing me to him.’ If M. Verdurin had, on the strength of these
last words, indeed introduced him to his guests, M. de Cambremer would
have thought it very wrong. But knowing that it was the opposite that
had taken place, he thought it gracious and to be running no risks to
assume a modest, good-natured expression. The pride that M. Verdurin
took in his intimacy with Cottard had only grown since the Doctor had
become an illustrious Professor. But it no longer expressed itself in
the naïve form of old. Then, when Cottard was scarcely known, should
anyone speak to M. Verdurin of his wife’s facial neuralgia: ‘There’s
nothing you can do,’ he would say, with the naïve smugness of the people
who suppose that those whom they know are famous and that everyone has
heard the name of their daughter’s singing teacher. ‘If her doctor were
in the second rank, we might be looking for a different treatment, but
when your doctor’s name is Cottard (a name he pronounced as though it
had been Bouchard or Charcot),¹²⁷ there’s no point in looking
elsewhere.’ Employing a contrary procedure, and knowing that M. de
Cambremer had certainly heard speak of the famous Professor Cottard, M.
Verdurin assumed a simple-minded expression. ‘He’s our family doctor, a
dear good soul whom we adore and who’d go through fire and water for us;
he’s not a doctor, he’s a friend; ‘I don’t suppose you know him or that
his name means anything to you; at all events, for us it’s the name of a
thoroughly good man, of a very dear friend, Cottard.’ This name,
murmured wearing a modest expression, deceived M. de Cambremer, who had
thought someone else had been meant. ‘Cottard? You’re not speaking of
Professor Cottard?’ At which exact moment the voice of the said
Professor was to be heard who, the play having gone against him, said as
he held up his cards: ‘And then it was prepare to meet thy doom.’ – Oh
yes, the very same, he’s a professor, said M. Verdurin. – What,
Professor Cottard! You’re not mistaken! You’re quite sure it’s the same
one, the one who lives in the rue de Bac! – Yes, he lives in the rue de
Bac, No 43. You know him? – But everyone knows Professor Cottard. He’s a
top man! It’s as though you were asking me whether I know Bouffe de
Saint-Blaise or Courtois-Suffit.¹²⁸ I could tell by listening to him
right enough that he was no ordinary man, that’s why I took the liberty
of asking you. – Let’s see now, what do I need to put down, a trump?’
asked Cottard. Then abruptly, with a vulgarity that would have been
irritating even in heroic circumstances, where a soldier tries to give a
familiar expression to his contempt for death, but which became doubly
foolish in the safe pastime of cards, Cottard, making up his mind to
play a trump, assumed a grim, ‘fire-eater’ air and, in an allusion to
those who risk their skins, staked his card as though it were his life,
exclaiming ‘After all, I don’t give a damn!’ It was not what he should
have played, but he found a consolation. In the middle of the
drawing-room, in a wide armchair, Mme Cottard, yielding to the effects,
irresistible in her case, of after-dinner, had, after a losing struggle,
succumbed to the vast if light sleep that had taken possession of her.
For all that she straightened up now and again, to smile, either in
self-mockery or else out of a fear of leaving some friendly word that
might have been addressed to her unanswered, she would then fall
helplessly back, in the grip of an implacable but delightful sickness.
Rather than the noise, what had thus aroused her, for a second only, was
the glance (which, in her fondness, she could see even with her eyes
closed, could foresee, for the same scene took place every evening and
haunted her sleep, like the hour when we shall have to get up), the
glance by which the Professor indicated his spouse’s slumbers to those
present. He was content at the start to look at her and smile, for if,
as a doctor, he was critical of this after-dinner sleep (he at any rate
gave this scientific reason so as to become angry towards the end, but
it is not certain that it was determinant, so various were the views he
held on the matter), as an all-powerful husband and a tease, he was
delighted to make fun of his wife, to only half wake her at first, so
that she might go back to sleep and he have the pleasure of waking her
again.

Mme Cottard was now fast asleep. ‘Here, I say, Léontine, you’re napping!
the Professor called out to her. – I’m listening to what Mme Swann is
saying, _mon ami_, Mme Cottard replied, weakly, and sank back into her
lethargy. – It’s nonsensical, exclaimed Cottard, in a minute she’ll be
declaring she hasn’t been asleep. It’s like the patients who come to a
consultation and claim that they never sleep. – They imagine it
perhaps,’ laughed M. de Cambremer. But the Doctor was as fond of
contradicting as he was of teasing, and above all could not allow a
layman to dare to talk medicine to him. ‘We can’t imagine that we don’t
sleep, he proclaimed in a dogmatic tone. – Ah, replied the Marquis,
bowing respectfully, as Cottard would once have done. – One can easily
tell, Cottard went on, that you’ve haven’t, as I have, administered up
to two grammes of trional without managing to induce somnolescence. –
Indeed, indeed, laughed the Marquis with a superior air, I’ve never
taken trional, or any of the drugs that soon cease to have any effect
but which do things to your stomach. When you’ve been shooting all night
as I have in the forest of Chantepie, I can assure you you don’t need
trional in order to get to sleep. – It’s the ignoramuses who say that,
replied the Professor. Trional can sometimes raise nerve-tone in a
remarkable way. You talk about trional, do you even know what it is? –
But… I’ve heard that it’s a medicine for sleeping. – You’re not
answering my question,’ replied the Professor pompously, who, three
times a week, in the Faculty, acted as an ‘examiner’. ‘I’m not asking
you whether it makes one sleep or not, but what it is. Can you tell me
what proportion it contains of amyl and ethyl? – No, replied M. de
Cambremer, in embarrassment. I prefer a good glass of brandy or even 345
port.¹²⁹ – Which are ten times more toxic, broke in the Professor. – As
for trional, ventured M. de Cambremer, my wife subscribes to all that
sort of thing, you’d do better to talk with her about it. – Who must
know just about as much as you do. Anyway, if your wife takes trional to
make her sleep, you can see that my wife has no need of it. Come,
Léontine, move yourself, you’ll get stiff, do I go to sleep after
dinner? What’ll you be like when you’re sixty if you drop off like an
old woman now? You’ll start to get stout, you’re stopping the
circulation… She can’t even hear me any more. – These little naps after
dinner are bad for the health, are they not, Doctor? said M. de
Cambremer, in order to rehabilitate himself with Cottard. After a good
meal one should take some exercise. – An old wives’ tale! replied the
Doctor. They’ve taken equal quantities of food from the stomach of a dog
that hadn’t moved, and from the stomach of a dog that had been running
and digestion was more advanced in the first. – So it’s sleep that
shortens digestion? – That depends on whether we’re talking about
oesophageal, stomachal or intestinal digestion; no point in giving you
explanations you wouldn’t understand since you’ve never studied
medicine. Come on, Léontine, by the front… quick march! It’s time we
went.’ This was not true, for the Doctor was merely about to go on with
his game of cards, but he was hoping by this more abrupt means to
interfere with the sleep of this speechless woman to whom he had been
addressing the most scientific exhortations without receiving any
further response. Either because the will to keep sleep at bay persisted
in Mme Cottard, even in the somnolent state, or because the armchair
lent it no support, her head was being jerked mechanically about in
space, from left to right and up and down, like some lifeless object,
and Mme Cottard, well-balanced where her head was concerned, appeared
now to be listening to music and now to have entered on the final phase
of her death agony. But where the increasingly vehement remonstrations
of her husband had failed, a sense of her own foolishness succeeded: ‘My
bath is just the right temperature, she murmured, but the feathers of
the dictionary… she exclaimed, coming upright. Oh good heavens, I’m so
silly! What am I saying? I was thinking about my hat, I must have said
something foolish, I was just about to doze off, it’s that wretched
fire.’ Everyone started to laugh, for there was no fire.

‘You’re making fun of me, said Mme Cottard, laughing herself, as she
wiped the last traces of sleep from her brow with her hand, with the
light touch of a mesmerist and the neatness of a woman rearranging her
hair. I would like to present my humble apologies to dear Madame
Verdurin and to learn the truth from her.’ But her smile quickly turned
unhappy, because the Professor, who knew that his wife was seeking to
please him, and was fearful of not having succeeded, had just called out
to her: ‘Look at yourself in the mirror, you’re as red as if you’d come
out in acne, you look like an old peasant woman. – He’s charming, you
know, said Mme Verdurin, he’s got a lovely bantering, good-natured side
to him. Besides, he brought my husband back from the edge of the grave
when the whole Faculty had given him up. He spent three nights beside
him, without going to bed. So for me, you know, she added, in a solemn,
almost menacing tone, raising her hand to the twin spheres of her
musical temples with their white tresses, and as if we had wanted to lay
hands on the Doctor, Cottard is sacred! He could ask for whatever he
wanted. Moreover, I don’t call him Doctor Cottard, I call him Doctor
God! And even when I say that I’m slandering him, for this God does
everything in his power to put right some of the evils the other one is
responsible for. – Play a trump, M. de Charlus told Morel, with a happy
expression. A trump, so as to see, said the violinist. You should have
declared your king first, said M. de Charlus, you’re distracted, but how
well you play! – I’ve got the king, said Morel. – He’s a fine-looking
man, replied the Professor. – What’s that affair up there with the
pickets? asked Mme Verdurin, indicating to M. de Cambremer a superb
carved escutcheon above the fireplace. Are they your _arms_? she added,
with ironic disdain. – No, they’re not ours, replied M. de Cambremer. We
bear Or with three bars embattled, counter-embattled Gules of five
pieces each charged with a trefoil of the field. No, those are the arms
of the Arrachepels, who weren’t of our stock, but from whom we inherited
the house, and those of our line have never wanted to change it. The
Arrachepels (Pelvilains in the old days, so it’s said) bore Or with five
piles couped Gules. When they intermarried with the Féternes their coat
of arms changed but remained cantoned with twenty crosses crosslet with
pile pery fitchy Or with dexter a vol ermine. – So much for you, said
Mme de Cambremer under her breath. – My great grandmother was a
d’Arrachepel or de Rachepel, as you wish, because both names are found
in the old charters, M. de Cambremer went on, suddenly blushing, for
only now did the thought occur to him that his wife had put him in dread
of and he was afraid that Mme Verdurin might have applied to herself
words that were in no way aimed at her. History has it that in the
eleventh century, the first Arrachepel, Macé, known as Pelvilain, showed
himself particularly skilled during a siege at uprooting stakes. Whence
the nickname of Arrachepel¹³⁰ under which he was ennobled, and the
stakes you see persisting through the centuries in their arms. The
stakes in question are those which, to make the fortifications harder to
approach, they planted, they bedded, if you’ll allow the expression, in
the ground in front of them, and then joined them together. It’s they
that you quite rightly called pickets and which had no connection with
the floating sticks of our good La Fontaine.¹³¹ For they were held to
make a place impregnable. That brings a smile obviously, what with
modern artillery. But you must remember we’re talking about the eleventh
century. – It lacks topicality, said Mme Verdurin, but the little
campanile has character. – You have, said Cottard, the luck of a…
cuckoo-clock, a word he happily repeated in order to avoid Molière’s
word.¹³² – Do you know why the king of diamonds failed his Army medical?
– I wish I’d been in his shoes,’ said Morel, who was bored by his
military service. – Oh, he’s no patriot, exclaimed M. de Charlus, who
could not restrain himself from pinching the violinist’s ear. – No, you
don’t know why the king of diamonds failed his medical? Cottard went on,
who insisted on his jokes, it’s because he’s only got one eye. – You’ve
got a hard game on your hands, Doctor, said M. de Cambremer, to show
Cottard that he knew who he was. – This young man is astonishing, M. de
Charlus broke in artlessly, pointing to Morel. He plays like a god.’
This observation did not much appeal to the Doctor, who replied: ‘Time
will show. He may be too cunning by half. – Queen, ace,’ announced Morel
triumphantly, the luck having been with him. The Doctor bowed his head
as if unable to deny this good fortune and admitted, fascinated: ‘That’s
good.’ – We’re so glad to have dined with M. de Charlus, said Mme de
Cambremer to Mme Verdurin. – You didn’t know him? He’s quite agreeable,
he’s unusual, he’s from _another era_’ (she would have found it hard to
say which), replied Mme Verdurin, with the self-satisfied smile of a
dilettante, a judge and a hostess. Mme de Cambremer asked me whether I
would be coming to Féterne with Saint-Loup. I could not contain a cry of
admiration on seeing the moon suspended like an orange-coloured lantern
from the vault of oak trees that led away from the château. ‘It’s
nothing as yet; in a minute, when the moon is higher and the valley is
lit up, it’ll be a thousand times more beautiful. That’s something you
don’t have at Féterne!’ she said scornfully to Mme de Cambremer, who did
not know how to reply, not wishing to run her own property down,
especially in front of her tenants. ‘Will you be staying some time yet
in these parts, Madame? M. de Cambremer asked Mme Cottard, which might
have passed for a vague intention to invite her but which excused him
for the present from any more precise arrangement. – Oh certainly,
Monsieur, I insist on this annual exodus for the children’s sake. No
matter what people say, they need the fresh air. I’m perhaps very
primitive in these matters, but I find that there’s no treatment for
children like good air, even though the contrary were to be proved to me
by A plus B. Their dear little faces are quite altered already. The
Faculty wanted to send me to Vichy; but it’s too airless and I’ll start
worrying about my stomach once these great big lads have grown a bit
more. Besides, the Professor, with the examinations he puts them
through, always has his nose to the grindstone and the heat tires him
out. I consider that you need frankly to relax when you’ve been hard at
it like him all year long. We shall be here for a good month yet,
whatever happens. – Ah, then we shall be seeing one another again. – I’m
all the more obliged to remain in any case because my husband has to do
a tour of Savoie and it’ll be another fortnight before he’s stationed
here permanently. – I like the valley side even more than the sea side,
Mme Verdurin went on. You’re going to have splendid weather for your
return. – We’ll even have to see whether the carriages are harnessed up,
in the event of your absolutely insisting on going back to Balbec this
evening, M. Verdurin said to me, because I don’t see the necessity for
it myself. We could have you driven back tomorrow morning by carriage.
It’ll certainly be fine. The roads are admirable.’ I said that it was
out of the question. ‘It’s not time, in any case,’ objected the
Patronne. ‘Let them be, they’ve plenty of time. Much good it’ll do them
arriving at the station an hour ahead of time. They’re better off here.
And you, my young Mozart, she said to Morel, not daring to address
herself directly to M. de Charlus, will you not stay? We have some
lovely bedrooms overlooking the sea. – But he can’t, replied M. de
Charlus, on behalf of the attentive card-player, who had not heard. He
has leave only up to midnight. He must go back there to sleep, like a
very good, very obedient little boy,’ he added, in a voice at once
self-satisfied, affected and insistent, as though he were deriving a
sadistic and voluptuous pleasure from employing this chaste comparison,
as well as letting his voice dwell in passing on what concerned Morel,
from touching him, for want of a hand, with words that seemed to be
palpating him.

From the sermon that Brichot had directed at me, M. de Cambremer had
concluded that I was a Dreyfusard. Since he was as anti-Dreyfusard as it
was possible to be, out of courtesy towards an enemy, he began to
eulogize a Jewish colonel to me who had always treated a cousin of the
Chevregnys with great fairness and had got him the promotion he
deserved. ‘And my cousin’s ideas were absolutely opposed to his,’ said
M. de Cambremer, sliding over what these ideas were, but which I sensed
to be as ancient and ill-formed as his own face, ideas that a few
families in certain small towns must have held for a long time past.
‘Well, you know, I find that very fine!’ M. de Cambremer ended. It is
true that he was hardly using the word ‘fine’ in the aesthetic sense,
where, in the case of his mother or his wife, it might have described
different works, but works of art. M. de Cambremer preferred to make use
of this qualifier when, for example, congratulating someone delicate on
having put on a little weight. ‘What, you’ve put back three kilos in two
months? You know, that’s fine!’ Refreshments were being served from a
table. Mme Verdurin invited the gentlemen to go themselves to choose the
drink that suited them. M. de Charlus went and drank his glass and came
quickly back, to sit beside the card-table, and did not stir again. Mme
Verdurin asked him: ‘Did you have some of my orangeade?’ Then M. de
Charlus, with a gracious smile and in a crystalline tone that was rare
with him, and with endless pursings of the lips and wigglings of his
torso, replied: ‘No, I preferred its neighbour, the _fraisette_¹³³ I
fancy, it’s delicious.’ It is strange that a certain category of secret
actions should have as their external consequence a manner of speaking
or of gesticulating which betrays them. If a gentleman believes, or not,
in the Immaculate Conception, or in Dreyfus’s innocence, or in the
plurality of worlds, but wishes to keep it to himself, you will find
nothing in his voice, or in his bearing, that enables you to see his
thoughts. But on hearing M. de Charlus say, in that high-pitched voice,
and with that smile and those movements of the arm, ‘No, I preferred its
neighbour, the _fraisette_’, you could have said: ‘Aha, he likes the
strong sex’, with the same certainty as that which enables a judge to
condemn a criminal who has not confessed, or a doctor a general
paralytic who perhaps does not know himself what is wrong with him but
who has made certain mistakes in pronunciation from which it can be
deduced that he will be dead within three years. Perhaps the people who
infer from the way of saying ‘No, I preferred its neighbour, the
_fraisette_’ to a so-called anti-physical love, have no need of so much
science. But that is because in this case there is a more direct
relationship between the tell-tale sign and the secret. Without quite
putting it into words, we sense that it is a gentle, smiling lady who is
answering and who appears affected because she is passing herself off as
a man and because we are not accustomed to seeing men put on so many
airs and graces. And it is more gracious perhaps to imagine that for a
long time now a certain number of angelic women have been included by
mistake in the male sex, where, as exiles, even as they vainly beat
their wings at the men whom they fill with a physical repulsion, they
know how to arrange a drawing-room or create an ‘interior’. M. de
Charlus was unconcerned that Mme Verdurin should be standing up, and
remained installed in his armchair so as to be closer to Morel. ‘Do you
not think it a crime, said Mme Verdurin to the Baron, that that person
there, who might be enthralling us with his violin, should be at the
_écarté_ table. When you can play the violin like he does! – He plays
cards well, he does everything well, he’s so intelligent,’ said M. de
Charlus, keeping an eye on the cards in order to advise Morel. This was
not as it happens his only reason for not getting up from his chair for
Mme Verdurin. With the peculiar amalgam that he had created out of his
social conceptions, as at once a great nobleman and an _amateur_ of the
arts, instead of being polite in the same way as another man from his
world would have been, he had created for himself _tableaux vivants_ of
a sort based on Saint-Simon; at this moment, he was amusing himself
playing the Maréchal d’Huxelles, other aspects also of whom were of
interest to him, whose vanity was such, so it was said, that he refused
to rise from his seat, seemingly out of laziness, for the most
distinguished members of the Court. ‘I say, Charlus, said Mme Verdurin,
who was beginning to grow familiar, you wouldn’t have in your Faubourg
some broken-down old nobleman who might come and be my porter? – But of
course… of course, replied M. de Charlus, smiling jovially, but I don’t
advise it. – Why? – I’d be afraid for your sake that fashionable
visitors might not get any further than the lodge.’ This was the first
of the skirmishes between them. Mme Verdurin hardly heeded it. There
were, alas, to be others in Paris. M. de Charlus continued not to leave
his chair. He could not, however, help smiling imperceptibly when he
saw, in the submission so readily obtained from Mme Verdurin,
confirmation of his favourite maxims as to the prestige of the
aristocracy and the cravenness of the bourgeoisie. The Patronne appeared
in no way surprised by the Baron’s posture and if she left him, it was
only because she had been concerned to see me being badgered by M. de
Cambremer. Before that, however, she wanted to elucidate the question of
M. de Charlus’s relations with the Comtesse Molé. ‘You told me you knew
Mme de Molé. Do you go there?’ she asked, giving to the words ‘go there’
the sense of being received by her, of having being authorized to call
on her. M. de Charlus replied with an inflection of disdain and an
affectation of precision, and in a sing-song tone: ‘But yes, now and
again.’ This ‘now and again’ sowed doubts in Mme Verdurin, who asked:
‘Have you met the Duc de Guermantes there? – Well, I don’t recall. – Ah,
you don’t know the Duc de Guermantes? – But how could I not know him?’
replied M. de Charlus, a smile causing his mouth to undulate. This smile
was ironic; but as the Baron was afraid of allowing a gold tooth to
show, he suppressed it beneath a reflux of his lips, so that the
resulting sinuosity was that of a smile of benevolence: ‘Why do you say,
“How could I not know him?” – But when he’s my brother,’ said M. de
Charlus off-handedly, leaving Mme Verdurin plunged in stupefaction and
uncertainty as to whether her guest was making fun of her, or was a
natural child or the son of another marriage. The idea that the Duc de
Guermantes’s brother might be called the Baron de Charlus never entered
her head. She made her way over to me: ‘I heard M. de Cambremer inviting
you to dinner just now. That’s all right with me, you understand. But in
your own best interest, I very much hope you won’t go. For one thing,
it’s infested with bores. Oh, if you enjoy dining with provincial counts
and marquises that no one knows, you’ll have your fill of them. – I
think I shall be obliged to go there once or twice. I’m not so free as
it happens, for I have a young cousin whom I can’t leave on her own (I
had found that this purported kinship simplified things where going out
with Albertine was concerned). But where the Cambremers are concerned,
since I’ve already introduced her to them… – You must do as you wish. I
can tell you this: it’s excessively unhealthy; and what good is it going
to do you to pick up an inflammation of the chest, or a nice little
family rheumatism? – But is it not a very pretty spot? – Mmmyesss… if
you like. But I confess to you frankly that I like the view over the
valley a hundred times better from here. For one thing, even if they’d
paid us, I wouldn’t have taken the other house, because the sea air is
fatal for M. Verdurin. Your cousin only needs to be a bit high-strung…
But then you’re high-strung, I fancy… you have breathless attacks. Well,
you’ll see! Go there once and you won’t sleep for a week. No, it’s not
the place for you.’ And without thinking how contradictory her next
words would be of the earlier ones: ‘If it’d amuse you to see the house,
which isn’t bad, pretty would be overstating it, but amusing after all,
with the old moat, the old drawbridge, as I shall have to go through
with it and dine there one time, well, come here that day, I’ll try to
bring all my little circle, then it’ll be nice. The day after tomorrow
we’re going to Arembouville by carriage. The road is magnificent, they
have delicious cider. Come with us. You, Brichot, you must come, too.
And you too, Ski. It’ll make an outing that my husband must have planned
in advance in any case. I’m none too sure who he’s invited. Monsieur de
Charlus, are you one of them?’ The Baron, who heard only these final
words and did not know they had been talking about an excursion to
Arembouville, gave a start: ‘Strange question,’ he murmured in a
sardonic tone, by which Mme Verdurin felt piqued. ‘Anyway, she said to
me, while we wait for the Cambremer dinner-party, why shouldn’t you
bring your cousin here? Does she like conversation, intelligent people?
Is she agreeable? Yes, well then, very good! Come with her. The
Cambremers aren’t the only people in the world. I can understand them
being glad to invite her, they can’t manage to get anyone. Here she’ll
have good air, and always men who are intelligent. At all events, I’m
counting on you not letting me down next Wednesday. I’ve heard you were
having a tea-party in Rivebelle with your cousin, M. de Charlus and I
don’t know who else. You ought to plan to transport the whole lot here,
it’d be nice, a small consignment en masse. Communications couldn’t be
simpler, the roads are ravishing; if need be, I’ll have you fetched. I
don’t know for that matter what you can find attractive in Rivebelle,
it’s infested with mosquitoes. Perhaps you’re thinking of the reputation
of its _galettes_. The ones my cook makes are in a different class.
‘I’ll make you eat Normandy _galettes_, the real thing, and the local
shortbread, I say no more. Oh, if you insist on the filth they serve in
Rivebelle, I want none of it, I don’t murder my guests, Monsieur, and
even if I wanted, my cook would refuse to make those unspeakable objects
and would change establishments. You don’t know what they’re made from,
the _galettes_ from there. I know a poor girl who got peritonitis from
them, which carried her off in three days. She was only seventeen. It’s
sad for her poor mother, added Mme Verdurin, with a melancholy
expression, beneath the spheres of her temples, weighed down by sorrow
and experience. But there, go and have tea in Rivebelle if it amuses you
to be fleeced and to throw money out of the window. Only, I beg you, I’m
entrusting you with a confidential mission: on the stroke of six
o’clock, bring all your people here, don’t let them disband and all go
off home one by one. You can bring whom you please. I wouldn’t say that
to everyone. But I’m sure your friends are nice, I can see here and now
that we understand one another. Apart from the little nucleus, some very
agreeable people are coming on Wednesday in fact. You don’t know little
Mme de Longpont? She’s a delight and so quick, not in the least bit
snobbish, you’ll see, you’ll really take to her. She’s also due to bring
a whole group of friends, added Mme Verdurin, to show that this was
quite the thing and to encourage me by example. We’ll see who has the
most influence and brings the most people, out of Barbe de Longpont and
you. Besides, I believe they’re due to bring Bergotte, too, she added
with a vague expression, the collaboration of that celebrity having been
rendered all too improbable by a notice that had appeared in the papers
that morning, to the effect that the great writer’s health was giving
rise to the gravest anxiety. Anyway, you’ll see, it’ll be one of my most
successful Wednesdays, I don’t want any women who are tiresome. Don’t
judge by this evening’s, in any case, that was a total failure. Don’t
protest, you can’t have been any more bored than I was, I found it
tedious myself. It won’t always be like this evening, you know! I’m not
talking about the Cambremers, moreover, who are impossible, but I’ve
known society people who passed for being agreeable, well, compared to
my little nucleus, they didn’t exist. I heard you say you thought Swann
intelligent. My opinion first of all is that that was much exaggerated,
but not even to speak of the man’s character, which I always found
fundamentally unsympathetic, sly, underhand, I often had him to dinner
on Wednesdays. Well, you can ask the others, even compared with Brichot,
who’s certainly no genius, but a good fifth-form teacher whom I got into
the Institute just the same, Swann was nothing any more. He was so
dreary!’ And as I was emitting a contrary opinion: ‘That’s the way it
was. I don’t want to say a word against him, since he was your friend;
he was very fond of you for that matter, he spoke about you in a
delightful way, but ask these people whether he ever said anything
interesting at our dinners. That’s the acid test after all. Well, I
don’t know why, but Swann when he came to me never produced, never gave
us anything. And yet the little that he was worth, he acquired it here.’
I assured her that he was very intelligent. ‘No, you only thought that
because you hadn’t known him for as long as I had. Basically, you very
soon got the measure of him. He bored _me_. (Translation: he went to the
La Trémoilles and the Guermantes and knew that I didn’t.) And I can
stand anything, except boredom. That, no, never!’ Her horror of being
bored was now the reason on which Mme Verdurin relied to explain the
make-up of her little circle. She had not yet entertained duchesses
because she was unable to be bored, as she was to go on a cruise on
account of sea-sickness. I told myself that what Mme Verdurin had been
saying was not wholly false and, whereas the Guermantes might have
declared Brichot to be the stupidest man they had ever met, I remained
unsure whether he was not at bottom superior, if not to Swann himself,
then at least to those people having the Guermantes sense of humour, who
would have had the good taste to avoid and the decency to blush at his
pedant’s facetiousness, or so I asked myself, as if a measure of light
might be thrown on the nature of intelligence by the answer I gave, with
the seriousness of a Christian, influenced by Port-Royal, posing the
problem of Grace to himself.¹³⁴ ‘You’ll see, Mme Verdurin continued,
when you have society people together with truly intelligent people,
people from our circle, that’s where you need to see them, the cleverest
man of the world in the kingdom of the blind is no more than a one-eyed
man here. He freezes the others, moreover, who no longer feel any
confidence. To the point where I ask myself whether, instead of trying
out the combinations that ruin everything, I shan’t have series for the
bores alone, so as to enjoy my little nucleus properly. We must end: you
shall come with your cousin. That’s agreed. Good. At least, here, the
two of you’ll get to eat. At Féterne, it’s hunger and thirst. Oh, I
mean, if you like rats, go there this instant, you’ll be offered your
fill of them. And they’ll keep you there as long as you like. I mean,
you’ll die of hunger. Anyway, when I go, I shall dine before setting
out. And to make it jollier, you must come and fetch me. We’ll have a
hearty tea and supper when we get back. Do you like _tarte aux pommes_?
Yes, well, our chef’s better at them than anybody. You can see, I was
right to say you were meant to live here. So come and stay. You know the
house is far roomier than it looks. I don’t tell people so as not to
attract bores. You could bring your cousin here permanently. She’d get
quite different air here from Balbec. With the air here, I claim I can
cure the incurable. Take my word for it, I’ve cured some, and not just
recently. Because I lived quite near here in the old days, something I’d
unearthed, that I got for a crust of bread and which had far more
character than their Raspelière. I’ll show you it if we take a drive.
But I acknowledge that even here, the air is really bracing. But then I
don’t want to talk about it too much, the Parisians would only have to
start liking my little hideaway. That’s always been my luck. Anyway,
tell your cousin. We’ll give you two pretty rooms overlooking the
valley, you’ll see it in the mornings, the sun in the mist! And who’s
this Robert de Saint-Loup you were talking about? she said anxiously,
for she had heard that I was due to go and visit him in Doncières and
was afraid he might cause me to default. You could bring him here
instead if he’s not a bore. I’ve heard about him through Morel, I fancy
he’s one of his great friends,’ said Mme Verdurin, telling a complete
lie, because Saint-Loup and Morel did not even know of one another’s
existence. But having heard that Saint-Loup knew M. de Charlus, she
thought that this was through the violinist and wanted to appear to be
in the swim of things. ‘He isn’t doing medicine by any chance, or
literature? You know, if you need a word putting in with examinations,
Cottard can do anything, and I can do what I like with him. As for the
Academy, for later on, for I imagine he’s not yet of an age, I can call
on several votes. Your friend’ll be on familiar ground here and it’d
perhaps amuse him to see the house. It’s not much fun, Doncières.
Anyway, you must do as you like, whatever suits you best,’ she ended,
without insisting, so as not to appear to be trying to get an
introduction to the nobility, and because her claim was that the name of
the regime under which she made the faithful live, her tyranny, was
liberty. ‘Hello, what’s the matter?’ she said, catching sight of M.
Verdurin, who, gesturing impatiently, had gone out on to the wooden
verandah that stretched above the valley on one side of the
drawing-room, like a man who is choking with rage and has need of fresh
air. ‘Is it Saniette again who’s been annoying you? But since you know
he’s an idiot, resign yourself to the fact, and don’t get into these
states… I don’t like it, she said to me, because it’s bad for him, he
goes blue in the face. But I have to say, too, that you sometimes need
the patience of an angel to put up with Saniette and to remind yourself
above all that it’s an act of charity to take him in. For my own part, I
confess, such is the magnificence of his stupidity, it delights me
rather. I imagine you heard his bon mot after dinner: “I can’t play
whist, but I can play the piano!” Isn’t that lovely! The greatest thing
you’ve ever heard, and a lie as it happens, because he can’t play one
any more than the other. But my husband, underneath his rough exterior,
is very sensitive, very kind, and that sort of selfishness in Saniette,
forever taken up with the effect he’s going to create, drives him wild…
Come, _mon petit_, calm yourself, you know very well Cottard told you it
was bad for your liver. And it’s I who’ll have to bear the brunt, said
Mme Verdurin. Tomorrow Saniette’s going to come with his little _crise
de nerfs_ and his tears. Poor man! He’s very ill. But then, that’s no
reason why he should kill others. Besides, even at the times when he’s
too unwell, when you’d like to feel sorry for him, his silliness stops
pity dead. He’s simply too stupid. You just need to tell him very gently
that these scenes are making the two of you ill, that he mustn’t come
back; since that’s what he most dreads, it’ll have a calming effect on
his nerves,’ whispered Mme Verdurin to her husband.

You could barely make out the sea through the right-hand windows. But
those on the other side showed the valley, on which there had now fallen
the snow of the moonlight. From time to time, the voice of Morel and
that of Cottard could be heard. ‘Have you got a trump?’ A ‘_yes_’ in
English. ‘Oh, you’ve got some good ones, _vous en avez de bonnes_,’ said
M. de Cambremer to Morel, in answer to his question, for he had seen
that the Doctor’s hand was full of trumps. ‘Here’s the wife of
diamonds,’ said the Doctor. That’s a trump, you know? Oy play, oy take…
But there isn’t a Sorbonne any more, said the Doctor to M. de Cambremer;
there’s only the University of Paris now.’ M. de Cambremer confessed
himself ignorant of why the Doctor had made this remark. ‘I thought you
were talking about the Sorbonne, the Doctor went on. I heard you say
“You’re bringing out the right one, _tu nous la sors bonne_,” he added
with a wink, to show that this was a witticism. Wait, he said, pointing
to his adversary, I’m getting ready to deliver the knock-out blow’. And
the blow had to be an excellent one so far as the Doctor was concerned,
for in his delight he began as he laughed to shake both shoulders
voluptuously, which in the family, in the Cottard ‘genus’, was an almost
zoological mark of satisfaction. In the previous generation, the
movement of rubbing the hands together as if one were soaping them had
accompanied this movement. Cottard himself had originally used this
double mimicry simultaneously, but one fine day, without anyone knowing
to what conjugal, or perhaps magisterial, intervention it was to be
attributed, the rubbing of the hands had disappeared. Even at dominoes,
when he forced his partner to ‘draw’ and take the double-six, which was
for him the keenest of pleasures, the Doctor contented himself with the
movement of the shoulders. And when – as rarely as possible – he went to
his native village for a few days, and met his first cousin again, who
for his part was still at the hand-rubbing stage, he would say on
returning to Mme Cottard: ‘I thought poor René very common.’ ‘Have you
got any of these little theengs? he said, turning to Morel. No? Then I
shall play this old David.¹³⁵ – But you’ve got five then, you’ve won! –
A fine victory, Doctor, said the Marquis. – A victory à la Pyrrhus,’
said Cottard, turning to the Marquis and peering over his eyeglass to
judge of the effect of his bon mot. ‘If we’ve still got time, he said to
Morel, I’ll give you your revenge. It’s me to… Ah, no, here are the
carriages, it’ll be for Friday, and I’ll show you a trick you don’t see
every day.’ M. and Mme Verdurin led us outside. The Patronne was
especially ingratiating with Saniette, so as to be sure he would come
back the next day. ‘But you don’t look covered up to me, _mon petit_, M.
Verdurin said to me, his advanced years sanctioning this fatherly form
of address. It’s as though the weather had changed.’ These words filled
me with joy, as if the profound life, the sudden appearance of different
combinations that they implied in nature, must herald other changes,
occurring this time in my own life and creating new possibilities there.
Merely by opening the door on to the gardens before leaving, you felt
that a different ‘weather’ had just then occupied the scene; breaths of
cool air, one of summer’s delights for the senses, were stirring in the
pine wood (where Mme de Cambremer had once dreamed of Chopin) and almost
imperceptibly, in caressing meanders and capricious eddies, had begun
their faint nocturnes. I refused the rug that I would accept on the
subsequent evenings when Albertine would be there, more for the secrecy
of our pleasures than against the risks of the cold. The Norwegian
philosopher was searched for in vain. Had he been taken with a
stomach-ache? Had he been afraid of missing the train? Had an aeroplane
come to fetch him? Had he been carried up in an Assumption? The fact was
that he had vanished without anyone having had the time to notice, like
a god. ‘You’re wrong, M. de Cambremer said to me, it’s as cold as
charity. – Why charity? asked the Doctor. Beware of breathless attacks,
the Marquis went on. My sister never goes out in the evenings. But then
she’s none too good at present. Don’t stay bare-headed like that,
anyway, get your headgear on quickly. – They’re not breathless attacks
_a frigore_, said Cottard sententiously. Oh, in that case, said M. de
Cambremer, bowing, since that’s your opinion… – Get a second opinion,’
said the Doctor, sneaking glances outside his eyeglass for a laugh. M.
de Cambremer did laugh but, convinced that he was right, he insisted.
‘Yet each time my sister goes out in the evenings he said, she has an
attack. – There’s no point in quibbling, answered the Doctor, without
being aware of his own rudeness. I don’t practise medicine at the
seaside in any case, unless summoned to a consultation. I’m here on
holiday.’ He was even more so as it happens than he might have wished.
M. de Cambremer having said to him as they got into the carriage
together: ‘We’re fortunate in having another medical celebrity, Doctor
du Boulbon, so close by (not on your side of the bay, on the other, but
it’s so shut in at that point),’ Cottard, who normally, on
_deontological_ grounds, abstained from criticizing his colleagues,
could not help exclaiming, as he had in front of me on that fateful day
when we had gone into the little casino: ‘But he’s not a doctor. He
practises literary medicine, a therapeutics of fantasy, quackery. We’re
on good terms even so. I’d take the boat to go and visit him one time
were I not obliged to absent myself.’ But from the expression that
Cottard assumed in order to discuss du Boulbon with M. de Cambremer, I
sensed that the boat on which he would have gladly gone in search of him
bore a close resemblance to the vessel which the doctors of Salerno had
fitted out to go and destroy the waters discovered by another literary
doctor, Virgil (who had also taken away their entire clientèle), but
which foundered with them during the crossing.¹³⁶ ‘Good-bye, _mon petit
Saniette_, don’t fail to come tomorrow, you know that my husband is very
fond of you. He likes your wit, your intelligence; yes, he does, you
know that, he likes putting on a show of brusqueness, but he can’t do
without seeing you. It’s always the first question he puts to me: “Is
Saniette coming? I so love seeing him!” – I’ve never said that,’ said M.
Verdurin to Saniette, with a simulated candour that seemed perfectly to
reconcile what the Patronne had been saying with his own treatment of
Saniette. Then, looking at his watch, no doubt so as not to to prolong
the farewells in the evening damp, he advised the coachmen not to
dawdle, but to be careful on the descent, and assured us that we would
get there before the train. The latter would be setting down the
faithful, one at one station, another at another, ending with myself,
none of the others going as far as Balbec, and starting with the
Cambremers. They, so as not to make their horses go all the way up to La
Raspelière in the dark, took the train with us to Douville-Féterne. The
nearest station to them was not in fact this one, which is some little
way from the village and even further from the château, but La Sogne. On
arriving at the station of Douville-Féterne, M. de Cambremer insisted on
‘crossing the palm’, as Françoise used to put it, of the Verdurins’
coachman (the same gentle, sensitive coachman, with the melancholy
ideas), for M. de Cambremer was generous, being ‘from his mama’s side’
rather in this. But whether it was that ‘his papa’s side’ intervened at
this juncture, even as he gave it, he felt qualms that a faux pas was
being committed – either by himself because, unable to see properly, he
might for example be giving a sou instead of a franc, or by the
recipient, who could not notice the size of the gift he was getting. He
drew attention to it, therefore. ‘That _is_ a franc I’m giving you,
isn’t it?’ he said to the coachman, causing the coin to reflect the
light, and so that the faithful might report it to Mme Verdurin. ‘Isn’t
it? It’s twenty sous, as it’s only a short ride.’ He and Mme de
Cambremer left us at La Sogne. ‘I shall tell my sister that you have
breathless attacks, he repeated to me. It’s sure to interest her.’ I
realized he meant: to please her. As for his wife, in taking leave of
me, she employed two of those abbreviations which, even when written,
used in those days to shock me in a letter, although we have grown used
to them since, but which, when spoken, seem to me still, even today, to
have about them, in their studied familiarity, something intolerably
pedantic: ‘Glad to have spent the evening with you, she said to me;
regards to Saint-Loup if you see him.’ In saying which words, Mme de
Cambremer pronounced it Saint-Loupe. I have never found out who had
pronounced it like that in her presence, or what had given her to
believe that it was to be so pronounced. The fact remains that for
several weeks she pronounced it Saint-Loupe, and that a man who had
great admiration for her and followed her in everything, did likewise.
Were other people to say Saint-Lou, they insisted, emphasizing the
Saint-Loupe, either indirectly to put these other people right, or else
to mark themselves off from them. But no doubt women more brilliant than
Mme de Cambremer told her, or gave her indirectly to understand, that it
should not be pronounced that way, and that what she had taken to be
originality was an error which would have it thought that she was not au
fait with the ways of society, for shortly afterwards Mme de Cambremer
was again saying Saint-Lou, and her admirer likewise abandoned all
resistance, either because she had lectured him, or because he had
noticed she was no longer sounding the final consonant, and had told
himself that if a woman of her worth, her energy and her ambition had
given in, it had to be with good reason. The worst of her admirers was
her husband. Mme de Cambremer loved teasing other people, often very
impertinently. As soon as she set about someone in this way, whether
myself or somebody else, M. de Cambremer began looking at the victim,
and laughing. As the Marquis had a squint – which can lend an intention
of wit to the amusement even of an imbecile – the effect of this laugh
was to bring a bit of the pupil back into the otherwise unbroken white
of his eye. Thus does a bright interval produce a patch of blue in a sky
fleecy with clouds. The monocle, moreover, protected this delicate
operation like the glass over a valuable painting. As for the actual
intention behind the laugh, one hardly knew whether it was friendly:
‘Ah, you rascal, you’re to be envied, and no mistake. You’ve found
favour with a woman with a strong sense of humour’; or catty: ‘Well
Monsieur, I hope that’s taught you a lesson, put that in your pipe and
smoke it’; or obliging: ‘I’m here, you know, I can laugh because it’s
all in fun, but I shan’t let you be maltreated’; or cruelly complicit:
‘I don’t have to add my own pennyworth, but, you can see, I find the
insults she’s heaping on you hilarious. I’m convulsed, so I approve, I
her husband. And so if you take it into your head to return the
compliment, you’ll find you’ve got me to deal with, _mon petit
Monsieur_. First you’d receive two good sound slaps on the cheek, then
we’d go and cross blades in the forest of Chantepie.’

Whatever the truth of these various interpretations of the husband’s
mirth, the wife’s passing whims soon came to an end. M. de Cambremer
would then leave off laughing, the temporary prunella would vanish, and
as you had, for the past few minutes, lost the habit of that completely
white eye, it lent this red-faced Norman something at once bloodless and
ecstatic, as though the Marquis had just been operated on, or were
imploring Heaven, beneath his monocle, for a martyr’s crown.


CHAPTER 3


_Sorrows of M. de Charlus. – His fictitious duel. – The stations of the
‘Transatlantic’. – Weary of Albertine, I want to break with her._

I could not keep awake. I was taken up as far as my floor in the lift,
not by the liftboy, but by the cross-eyed _chasseur_, who struck up a
conversation to relate to me that his sister was still with the very
rich gentleman, and that one time, because she had wanted to return home
rather than behave responsibly, her gentleman had sought out the mother
of the cross-eyed _chasseur_, and of the other, more favoured children,
who had taken the nonsensical girl back to her friend as quickly as
possible. ‘You know, Monsieur, she’s a great lady, my sister. She plays
the piano and can speak Spanish. You mightn’t believe it, of the sister
of the mere employee who takes the lift up, but she denies herself
nothing; Madame has her own maidservant, it wouldn’t amaze me if one day
she had her own carriage. She’s very pretty, if you could see her, a bit
too stuck-up, but Lord, that’s understandable! She’s quite a humorist.
She never leaves a hotel without relieving herself in a wardrobe or a
chest of drawers, so as to leave a small memento for the chambermaid
who’ll have to clean up. Sometimes, she even does it in a cab, and after
she’s paid her fare, she hides in a corner, so’s to have a good laugh
watching the driver curse and swear who’s got to wash down his cab
again. My father had a stroke of luck, too, finding that Indian prince
he’d met in the old days for my young brother. Of course, that’s a
different kind of arrangement. But it’s a superb position. If it weren’t
for the travelling, what you dream of. There’s only me up till now who’s
been left out. But you can never tell. Luck runs in my family; who knows
whether I won’t one day be President of the Republic? But I’m making you
chatter on (I had not said a single word and was starting to fall asleep
listening to his words). Good night, Monsieur. Oh, thank you, Monsieur!
If everyone was as kind-hearted as yourself, there’d be no poor people
any more. But as my sister says, there’ll always need to be some so that
now I’m rich, I can tell them to go to blazes. Pardon the expression.
Good night, Monsieur.’

Every night perhaps we accept the risk of experiencing, while we sleep,
sufferings that we consider to be null and void because they will be
endured only in the course of a sleep that we believe is without
consciousness. In fact, on the evenings when I returned home late from
La Raspelière, I was very sleepy. But as soon as the cold weather
arrived, I was unable to get to sleep straight away because the
brightness from the fire was as if a lamp had been lit. It had only
flared up, however, and – as with a lamp, or the daylight when dusk
falls – its too bright light was not long in dying down; and I entered
into sleep, which is like a second apartment that we have, into which,
abandoning our own, we go in order to sleep. It has its own system of
alarms, and we are sometimes brought violently awake there by the sound
of a bell, heard with perfect clarity, even though no one has rung. It
has its servants, its particular visitors who come to take us out, so
that, just when we are ready to get up, we are obliged to recognize, by
our almost immediate transmigration into the other apartment, that of
our waking hours, that the room is empty, that no one has come. The race
which inhabits it, like that of the earliest humans, is androgynous. A
man there will appear a moment later in the aspect of a woman. Objects
have the ability to turn into men, and men into friends or enemies. The
time that elapses for the sleeper, in sleep of this kind, is utterly
different from the time in which a waking man’s life transpires. Its
passage may now be far more rapid, a quarter of an hour seeming like a
whole day; or at other times much longer, we think we have just dozed
off, and have slept right through the day. And then, on sleep’s chariot,
we descend into depths where the memory can no longer keep pace with it
and where the mind stops short and is forced to turn back. Sleep’s
horses, like those of the sun, move at so uniform a pace, in an
atmosphere where no resistance can any longer arrest them, that some
small alien aerolith is needed (hurled from the azure by what Unknown
Hand?) if this regular sleep is to be affected (which would otherwise
have no reason to stop but would endure with a similar motion until the
end of time) and made to return, wheeling suddenly about, towards
reality, traversing without drawing breath the borderlands of life – the
sounds of which, vague almost as yet, but already perceptible, though
distorted, the sleeper will soon be hearing – and comes abruptly to
earth at our waking. From these deep sleeps we then awake in a dawn, not
knowing who we are, being nobody, quite new, prepared for anything, our
brain finding itself emptied of the past that had hitherto been our
life. And perhaps it is better still when the return to earth of our
waking is a brutal one and when our sleeping thoughts, concealed behind
a vestment of oblivion, do not have time progressively to return before
sleep has ended. Then, from the black storm through which we seem to
have passed (but we do not even say _we_) we emerge lying prostrate,
without any thoughts: a ‘we’ it may be without content. What hammer-blow
has this person or thing that is here received that it should be aware
of nothing, be stupefied, up until such time as the memory comes
hurrying back, and restores its consciousness or personality? For these
two kinds of reawakening, however, we must not go to sleep, not even
deeply, under the law of habit. For habit keeps watch over all that it
imprisons in its nets; we must elude it, find sleep at the moment when
we thought we were doing something quite other than sleeping, find the
sleep in short that does not dwell under the tutelage of foresight, in
the company, even concealed, of reflection. At all events, in
reawakenings such as I have just described them, and which were mine
most often after I had dined the evening before at La Raspelière,
everything took place as if this were how it was, and I can testify, I,
the strange human being who, while waiting for death to deliver him,
lives behind closed shutters, knows nothing of the world, stays unmoving
as an owl and, like an owl, can see with any clarity only in the dark.
Everything takes place as if this were how it was, but perhaps only a
layer of cotton-wool has prevented the sleeper from perceiving the inner
dialogue between his memories and the incessant verbiage of sleep. For
(which can be explained just as readily for that matter in the first,
vaster, more mysterious, more astral system), at the moment when waking
occurs, the sleeper hears an inner voice that says to him: ‘Will you be
coming to that dinner this evening, my dear friend? How pleasant that
would be!’ and thinks: ‘Yes, since it’ll be pleasant, I shall go’; then,
his wakefulness increasing, he suddenly remembers: ‘My grandmother has
only a few weeks to live, so the doctor assures us.’ He rings the bell,
weeps at the thought that, unlike in the past, it will not be his
grandmother, his dying grandmother, who will come to answer it, but an
indifferent _valet de chambre_. Moreover, when sleep carried him so far
away from the world inhabited by memory and thought, through an ether in
which he was alone, more than alone, without that companion even in whom
we perceive ourselves, he was outside of time and its measurement. The
_valet de chambre_ is already entering, and he does not dare ask him the
time, for he does not know whether he has been asleep, nor how many
hours he has slept (he wonders whether it is not how many days, having
returned so broken in body, so rested in spirit, and so homesick in his
heart, as if from a journey too distant not to have lasted for a long
time). True, we can claim that there is only one time, for the futile
reason that it is by looking at the clock that we have confirmed that
what we thought was a whole day was only a quarter of an hour. But at
the moment when we confirm it, we are of course a man awake, plunged
into the time of waking men, we have deserted the other time. Perhaps
even more than another time: another life. We do not include the
pleasures we have during sleep when reckoning up those we have
experienced in the course of our existence. To allude only to the most
crudely sensual of them, which of us, on waking, has not felt some
irritation at having experienced, while we slept, a pleasure which,
unless we want to overtax ourselves, we cannot, once awake, repeat
indefinitely on that particular day? It is as if a part of our substance
has been wasted. We have felt pleasure in another life that is not ours.
Were we to include the pains and pleasures of our dreams (which
generally vanish very quickly on waking) in a budget, it would not be in
that of our everyday life.

Two kinds of time, I have said; perhaps there is only one, not because
that of the waking man holds good for the sleeper, but perhaps because
the other life, that in which we sleep, is not – in its profound part –
subject to the category of time. That is what I imagined when, in the
aftermath of the dinners at La Raspelière, I went so completely asleep.
Here is why. I was beginning to feel desperate when, on waking, I found
that, after I had rung ten times, the valet had not arrived. At the
eleventh, he entered. It was only the first time. The other ten had been
mere adumbrations in my still continuing sleep of the summons that I
wanted. My numbed hands had not even moved. On these mornings (which is
what makes me say that sleep perhaps knows nothing of the law of time),
my attempt to wake up consisted above all in an attempt to introduce the
obscure, undefined block of sleep that I had just been living into the
framework of time. This is no easy task; the sleep that does not know
whether we have slept for two hours or for two days cannot provide us
with a point of reference. And if we do not discover one outside of it,
and do not succeed in re-entering time, we go back to sleep again, for
five minutes that seem to us like three hours.

I have always said – and proved by experience – that sleep is the most
potent of hypnotics. Having slept deeply for two hours, fought with any
number of giants, and formed any number of undying friendships, it is
far more difficult to come awake than after taking several grams of
veronal. And so, reasoning from one to the other, I was surprised to
learn through the Norwegian philosopher, who had had it from M.
Boutroux, ‘his eminent associate – forgive me, his colleague’, what M.
Bergson thought about the particular ill effects on the memory produced
by hypnotics. ‘Of course, M. Bergson will have said to M. Boutroux, if
the Norwegian philosopher is to be believed, hypnotics taken from time
to time in moderate doses do not affect the solid memory of our everyday
lives, so firmly fixed in us. But there are other kinds of memory,
higher and more unstable ones. One of my colleagues is lecturing on
ancient history. He has told me that if, the night before, he had taken
a pill to get to sleep, he had difficulty, during his lecture, in
recovering the Greek quotations that he needed. The doctor who had
recommended the pills to him assured him they did not affect the memory.
“Perhaps that’s because you don’t have to give Greek quotations,” the
historian had replied, not without a mocking vanity.’

I do not know whether this conversation between M. Bergson and M.
Boutroux is accurate. The Norwegian philosopher, very profound and lucid
though he was, and so passionately attentive, may have misunderstood. My
personal experience has given me the opposite results. The moments of
oblivion that ensue, the next day, after we have ingested certain
narcotics, bear only a partial, if troubling, resemblance to the
oblivion that reigns in the course of a night of deep, natural sleep.
Now, what I forget in either case is not some line of Baudelaire’s which
wearies me rather, ‘like a dulcimer’,¹ not some concept from one of the
philosophers I have been citing, but the very reality of the common
objects that surround me – if I am asleep – my non-perception of which
turns me into a madman; it is – if I am awake and emerging after an
artificial sleep – not the system of Porphyry or Plotinus, which I am as
able to discuss as on any other day, but the answer I have promised to
give to an invitation, the memory of which has been replaced by a
complete blank. The elevated idea has remained in place; what the
hypnotic has disabled is our capacity to act in minor matters, in
everything that calls for action if we are to repossess it just in time,
to seize hold of some memory of our everyday life. Despite all that may
be said about survival after the destruction of the brain, I observe
that to every deterioration in the brain there corresponds a fragment of
death. We possess all our memories, if not the faculty of recalling
them, says, following M. Bergson, the great Norwegian philosopher, whose
language I have not tried to imitate, so as not to slow things down any
further. If not the faculty of recalling them. But what is a memory that
we cannot recall? Or let us go further. We do not recall our memories of
the last thirty years; but we are totally steeped in them; why then stop
at thirty years, why not continue this previous existence back beyond
our birth? Given that I do not know a whole portion of the memories that
are behind me, given that they are invisible to me, that I do not have
the faculty of summoning them, who is to say that in this mass which is
unknown to me, there are not memories that date back long before my life
as a man? If I can have, in me and around me, so many memories that I do
not remember, this oblivion (a _de facto_ oblivion at least, since I do
not have the faculty of seeing anything) may apply to a life that I have
lived in the body of another man, or even on another planet. The one
oblivion erases everything. But what then would the immortality of the
soul signify whose reality the Norwegian philosopher had asserted? The
person that I shall be after death has no more reason to remember the
man that I have been since my birth than this latter remembers what I
was before it.

The _valet de chambre_ had entered. I did not tell him that I had rung
several times, for I realized that hitherto all I had done was to dream
that I had rung. I was alarmed to think, however, that this dream had
had the clarity of a cognition. Could cognition, by the same token, have
the unreality of a dream?

I asked him on the other hand who had rung so many times during the
night. He told me ‘no one’, and could say that with certainty, because
it would have shown up on the ‘board’. Yet I had heard repeated, almost
furious peals, which vibrated still in my ear and were to remain audible
for several days. It is rare, however, for sleep thus to discharge into
waking life memories which do not die with it. Such aeroliths can be
counted. If it is an idea that sleep has forged, this quickly
disintegrates into tenuous, irretrievable fragments. But here sleep had
fabricated sounds. Being more physical and simpler, they had lasted
longer. I was astonished at the relatively early hour the _valet de
chambre_ told me that it was. I felt rested nonetheless. It is light
sleeps that are of long duration, because, being intermediate between
waking and sleeping, and preserving a partly erased but permanent notion
of the former, they require an infinitely longer time to refresh us than
does a deep sleep, which may be short. I felt thoroughly at ease for
another reason. If reminding ourselves that we are tired is enough to
make us painfully aware of our tiredness, to say to ourselves ‘I feel
rested’ is enough to create repose. Now I had dreamed that M. de Charlus
was a hundred and ten years old and had just twice slapped his mother,
Mme Verdurin, in the face for spending five billion on a bunch of
violets; I was assured therefore of having slept deeply, and of having
dreamt the contrary of my notions of the day before and of all the
possibilities of my current life; that was enough for me to feel fully
rested.

I would have greatly astonished my mother, who could not understand M.
de Charlus’s assiduousness _chez_ Verdurin, if I had told her (on the
very day on which Albertine’s toque had been ordered, without my saying
a word to her, so that it might come as a surprise) with whom M. de
Charlus had come to dine in a private room at the Grand-Hôtel in Balbec.
His guest was none other than the footman of a cousin of the Cambremers.
This footman was dressed with great elegance, and when he crossed the
hall with the Baron, ‘played the man-of-the-world’ in the eyes of the
tourists, as Saint-Loup would have put it. Even the young _chasseurs_,
the ‘Levites’, a crowd of whom were descending the steps of the temple
at that moment, which was that of their going off duty, paid no
attention to the two new arrivals, one of whom, M. de Charlus, was
anxious to show, by his lowered gaze, how very little he was according
them. He seemed to be pushing his way through their midst. ‘_Prospérez,
cher espoir d’une nation sainte_,’² he said, recalling some lines from
Racine, quoted in a very different sense. ‘I beg your pardon?’ asked the
footman, none too well versed in the classics. M. de Charlus did not
answer, for he took a certain pride in discounting questions and in
walking straight ahead of him, as if there were no other guests in the
hotel and as if he alone, the Baron de Charlus, existed in the world.
But having continued with Josabeth’s lines: ‘_Venez, venez, mes
filles_’³, he felt distaste and did not add, as she does, ‘_il faut les
appeler_’,⁴ for these children had not yet reached the age when
sexuality is fully developed, and which appealed to M. de Charlus.
Although, moreover, he had written to Mme de Chevregny’s footman,
because he did not doubt his docility, he had hoped he would be more
virile. On seeing him, he found him more effeminate than he would have
liked. He told him that he would have expected to be dealing with
someone else, for he knew another of Mme de Chevregny’s footmen by
sight, having in fact noticed him on her carriage. This was a sort of
country bumpkin, the complete opposite of the present one, who,
adjudging his fancy ways to be so many marks of superiority, and not
doubting that it was these man-of-the-world qualities that had seduced
M. de Charlus, could not even understand who the Baron meant. ‘But I’ve
no workmates except for one and you can’t have had your eye on him, he’s
a fright, he looks like a great fat peasant.’ And at the thought that it
was perhaps this yokel whom the Baron had seen, he felt punctured in his
self-esteem. The Baron guessed as much, and widening his inquiries: ‘But
I haven’t made a special vow to know only Mme de Chevregny’s people, he
said. Couldn’t you, whether here or in Paris, since you’ll soon be
going, introduce many of your workmates to me, from one house or
another? – Oh no, replied the footman, I don’t associate with anyone
from my own class. I only speak to them when on duty. But there’s one
highly respectable person – could introduce you to. – Who? asked the
Baron. – The Prince de Guermantes.’ M. de Charlus was greatly put out
that he should be offered only a man that old, and with whom, what was
more, he had no need of a recommendation from a footman. Thus he curtly
declined the offer and, not allowing himself to be deterred by the
flunkey’s social pretensions, he began again to explain to him what he
would like, the style, the type, a jockey maybe, and so on. Afraid that
the lawyer who was passing at that moment might have overheard him, he
thought it canny to show that he had been talking about something quite
other than what might have been supposed, and said with insistence, and
to the company at large, but as if all he were doing was continuing the
conversation: ‘Yes, despite my years, I have kept my taste for
curio-hunting, my taste for pretty curios, I’ll spend more than I can
afford on an old bronze or an antique chandelier. I worship Beauty.’ But
to get the footman to understand the change of subject that he had
executed so rapidly, M. de Charlus laid so much stress on each word, and
in addition, so that the lawyer should hear, shouted them all out so
loudly, that this whole bit of play-acting would have sufficed to reveal
what it was concealing to ears more alert than those of the legal
official. The latter no more suspected anything than any other of the
hotel guests, all of whom saw an elegant foreigner in the very
well-turned-out footman. On the other hand, if the men of the world were
deceived and took him for an ultra-smart American, hardly had he
appeared before the servants before they saw through him, just as one
convict will recognize another convict, even quicker, nosed out from
afar, as one animal is by certain others. The _chefs de rang_ raised an
eyebrow. Aimé cast a suspicious glance. The _sommelier_, shrugging his
shoulders, said behind his hand, because he thought this was politeness,
a disobliging phrase that everyone heard. And even our old Françoise,
whose sight was failing and who was passing the bottom of the stairs at
that moment, to go and eat with the guests’ servants, looked up,
recognized a domestic where the hotel guests had not suspected one –
just as the old nurse Euryclea recognizes Ulysses long before the
suitors at the banquets⁵ – and, seeing M. de Charlus walking with him in
this familiar manner, appeared overcome, as if all of a sudden, wicked
things that she had heard spoken but had not believed had assumed in her
eyes a distressing probability. She never mentioned this incident, to me
or to anyone else, but it must have set her brain to working hard, for
later on, whenever in Paris she had occasion to see ‘Julien’, of whom
she had hitherto been so fond, she always treated him with politeness,
but which had cooled and was always diluted by a strong admixture of
reserve. This same incident led someone else to entrust me with a
confidence, on the other hand; this was Aimé. When I passed M. de
Charlus, the latter, who had not been expecting to come across me, had
called out, raising his hand, ‘Good evening’, with the indifference,
apparent at least, of a great nobleman who believes he is a law unto
himself and deems it more adroit not to appear to be hiding. But Aimé,
who had just then been observing him with a distrustful eye and saw that
I greeted the companion of the man in whom he was sure of having
recognized a domestic, asked me that same evening who he was. For Aimé
had for some time now liked to chat or rather, as he put it, no doubt in
order to mark the, as he saw it, philosophical nature of these chats, to
‘debate’ with me. And as I had frequently told him it embarrassed me
that he should remain standing beside me as I ate, when he could have
sat down and shared my meal, he declared that he had never come across a
guest having ‘such sound powers of argument’. He was talking at that
moment with two waiters. They had bowed to me, I did not know why; their
faces were not known to me, although there sounded in their conversation
a confused murmur that did not seem new. Aimé was upbraiding the two of
them for having become engaged, of which he disapproved. He called me as
a witness, I said I could not have an opinion, not knowing them. They
reminded me of their names, and that they had often waited on me in
Rivebelle. But one of them had let his moustache grow, the other had
shaved his off and been shorn; as the result of which, although it was
the old heads that were set on their shoulders (and not a different one,
as in the faulty restorations at Notre-Dame),⁶ they had remained as
invisible for me as those objects that elude the most painstaking
search, yet are simply lying in full view, unnoticed by anyone, on a
mantelpiece.⁷ The moment I learned their names, I recognized exactly the
uncertain music of their voices, for I could again see the old faces
that had determined it. ‘They want to get married and they don’t even
know English!’ Aimé said to me, without reflecting that I was not well
up in the profession of hotelier and hardly understood that if you do
not know foreign languages you cannot rely on finding a position. I, who
had expected him to find out soon enough that this new diner was M. de
Charlus, and even imagined that he must remember him, having waited on
him in the dining-room when the Baron had come to see Mme de
Villeparisis during my first stay in Balbec, told him his name. Not only
did Aimé not remember the Baron de Charlus, but the name appeared to
make a strong impression on him. He told me that the next day he would
hunt among his belongings for a letter that I might be able to explain
to him. I was all the more surprised in that M. de Charlus, when he had
wanted to give me one of Bergotte’s books in Balbec, that first year,
had made a special point of asking for Aimé, whom he must have come
across again subsequently in the restaurant in Paris where I had had
lunch with Saint-Loup and his mistress, and where M. de Charlus had come
to spy on us. It is true that Aimé had not been able to carry out these
missions in person, having been, in the one instance, in bed, and the
second time busy serving. I had serious doubts, however, as to his
sincerity when he claimed not to know M. de Charlus. For one thing, he
must have suited the Baron. Like all the _chefs d étage_ at the Balbec
hotel, and like several of the Prince de Guermantes’s _valets de
chambre_, Aimé belonged to a race more ancient than that of the Prince
and hence more noble. When you asked for a private room, you thought at
first you were alone. But soon, in the pantry, you observed a sculptural
_maître d’hôtel_, of that red-haired Etruscan kind of which Aimé was the
type, somewhat aged by an excess of champagne and seeing the moment for
Contrexéville water unavoidably approaching. Not all the guests asked
them only to wait on them. The commis waiters, who were young,
scrupulous and in a hurry, with a mistress waiting for them in the town,
made their escape. And so Aimé would criticize them for their
irresponsibility. He had the right. He _was_ responsible. He had a wife
and children, and was ambitious for them. Thus he did not repel the
advances made to him by a stranger, male or female, even though he might
have to remain all night. For work must come before anything else. He
was so much the kind of person to appeal to M. de Charlus that I
suspected him of a falsehood when he told me he did not know him. I was
wrong. It was the simple truth when the _chasseur_ told the Baron that
Aimé (who had hauled him over the coals the next day) had gone to bed
(or gone out), and on the other occasion was busy serving. But the
imagination goes beyond the reality in supposition. And the _chasseur_’s
embarrassment had probably sown doubts in M. de Charlus as to the
genuineness of his excuses, doubts which had wounded feelings in him
that Aimé had not suspected. We have seen also that Saint-Loup had
prevented Aimé from going to the carriage, in which M. de Charlus, who
had somehow or other obtained the _maître d’hôtel_’s new address, had
suffered a fresh disappointment. Aimé, who had not noticed him, felt the
astonishment one can imagine when, on the evening of the same day on
which I had had lunch with Saint-Loup and his mistress, he received a
letter sealed with the Guermantes arms, from which I shall quote a few
passages as an example of unilateral madness in an intelligent man
addressing an imbecile of good sense. ‘Monsieur, I have not succeeded,
in spite of efforts that would surprise many people seeking uselessly to
be received and acknowledged by me, in getting you to listen to the few
explanations for which you did not ask me but which I thought it
befitting both my dignity and your own to offer you. I shall therefore
write here what it would have been simpler to say to you in person. I
shall not hide from you that the first time I set eyes on you in Balbec,
I found your face frankly unsympathetic.’ There then followed
reflections on the resemblance – remarked only on the second day – to a
deceased friend for whom M. de Charlus had felt great affection. ‘I then
had the idea for a moment that you might, without it at all hindering
you in your profession, come and have with me the games of cards with
which his gaiety was able to dispel my sadness, and give me the illusion
that he was not dead. Whatever the nature of the more or less foolish
supposition that you have probably arrived at, and more within reach of
a servant (who does not even deserve that name since he has refused to
serve) than the comprehension of so elevated a sentiment, you probably
thought to make yourself seem important, not knowing who I was and what
I was, by sending reply, when I made them ask you for a book, that you
were in bed; but it is a mistake to believe that an incivility can ever
add to one’s charms, of which you are in any case totally devoid. I
would have broken things off then had I not, by chance, been able to
speak to you the following morning. Your resemblance to my poor friend
became so marked, causing even the unbearable shape of your protuberant
chin to vanish, that I realized that it was the deceased who, at that
moment, was lending you something of his own very kindly expression so
as to enable you to take hold of me again, and prevent you from wasting
the unique good fortune that was being offered to you. Indeed, although
I do not wish, since all this has no longer any object, and I shall have
no further occasion to meet you in this life, to bring into all this
brutal questions of self-interest, I would have been only too happy to
obey my dead friend’s prayer (for I believe in the communion of saints
and their impulse to intervene in the destiny of the living), to behave
towards you as towards him, who had his own carriage and his servants,
and to whom it was perfectly natural that I should devote the greater
part of my resources since I loved him like a son. You have decided
otherwise. To my request that you bring me a book, you sent reply that
you had to go out. And this morning, when I sent to ask you to come to
my carriage, you, if I can so put it without committing a sacrilege,
denied me for a third time. You will forgive me for not enclosing in
this envelope the elevated gratuities that I had counted on giving you
in Balbec, and to which I would find it too painful to adhere in respect
of someone with whom I had thought for a moment to share everything. You
might at the very least spare me making a fourth futile approach to you,
in your restaurant, to which my patience will not extend. (And here M.
de Charlus gave his address, an indication of the times when he could be
found in, etc.) Farewell, Monsieur. Since I believe that, resembling as
you do the friend that I have lost, you cannot be entirely stupid, as
otherwise physiognomy would be a false science, I am persuaded that if,
one day, you think back on this incident, it will not be without
experiencing a certain regret and a certain remorse. For my own part,
believe me when I quite genuinely say that I harbour no bitterness. I
would have preferred us to part on a less unhappy memory than this third
futile overture. It will be quickly forgotten. We are like those vessels
that you must have seen now and again from Balbec, which have crossed
for a moment; it might have been to the advantage of either one to stop;
but one of them has seen things differently; soon they will be out of
sight of one another on the horizon, and the encounter is erased; but
before this final separation, each salutes the other, as does here,
Monsieur, wishing you every good fortune, the Baron de Charlus.’

Aimé had not even read this letter to the end, able to make neither head
nor tail of it, but suspecting a hoax. Once I had explained to him who
the Baron was, he appeared somewhat thoughtful and experienced that
regret which M. de Charlus had predicted. I would not even swear that he
did not then write to apologize to a man who gave carriages to his
friends. But in the interim, M. de Charlus had made the acquaintance of
Morel. At most, his relations with the latter being perhaps Platonic, M.
de Charlus would now and again seek out company for an evening such as
that in which I had just met him in the hall. But he could no longer
turn away from Morel the violent sentiments which, free a few years
earlier, had asked for nothing better than to attach themselves to Aimé
and had dictated the letter that made me feel embarrassed for M. de
Charlus’s sake and which the _maître d’hôtel_ had shown me. It was,
because M. de Charlus’s love was of an anti-social kind, a more striking
example of the imperceptible yet mighty force of these currents of
passion, in which the lover, like a swimmer being swept away unawares,
very soon loses sight of land. Doubtless the love of a normal man also
can, when, by the successive inventions of his desires, his regrets, his
disappointments and his projects, the lover constructs an entire novel
around a woman whom he does not know, enable us to measure the notable
divergence between the two legs of the compass. At the same time, this
divergence was singularly widened by the nature of a passion that is not
usually shared, and by the difference in status between M. de Charlus
and Aimé.

I went out with Albertine every day. She had made up her mind to go back
to painting and had chosen to work first at the church of
Saint-Jean-de-la-Haise, which no one any longer visits and is known to
very few, hard to get directions to, impossible to find without being
guided, and takes a long time to reach in its isolation, more than half
an hour from the station at Epreville, the last houses in the village of
Quetteholme having been left well behind. Where the name Epreville was
concerned, I found no agreement between the _curé_’s book and Brichot’s
indications. According to the one, Epreville was the ancient
_Sprevilla_; the other gave _Aprivilla_ as the etymology. The first time
we took the little railway in the opposite direction to Féterne, that is
to say towards Grattevast. But it was the dog-days and terrible enough
in itself to be leaving straight after lunch. I would have preferred not
to go out so soon; the burning, luminous air awoke thoughts of indolence
and refreshment. It filled my and my mother’s rooms, according to their
exposure, with unequal temperatures, like rooms at a spa. Mama’s
bathroom, festooned with sunlight, of a brilliant, Moorish whiteness,
seemed plunged in the bottom of a well, on account of the four plaster
walls on which it looked out, while up above, in the square left empty,
the sky, whose fleecy, superimposed billows of cloud could be seen
gliding past, one above the other, resembled (because of the longing you
felt) a pool, situated on a terrace (or seen inverted in a mirror
attached to the window) and filled with blue water, reserved for your
ablutions. Despite the burning temperature, we had gone to catch the one
o’clock train. But Albertine had felt very hot in the compartment, and
hotter still during the long journey on foot, and I was afraid she might
catch cold by then remaining motionless in that damp hollow to which the
sun does not reach. On the other hand, having realized, ever since our
first visits to Elstir, that she would appreciate not simply the luxury,
but even a certain measure of comfort of which her lack of money had
deprived her, I had arranged with a livery stable in Balbec that a
carriage should come to fetch us every day. To avoid the heat, we took
the road through the forest of Chantepie. The invisibility of the
innumerable birds, some of them half seabirds, that were calling to one
another in the trees beside us, gave the same impression of repose as
you get with your eyes shut. At Albertine’s side, imprisoned by her arms
in the back of the carriage, I listened to these Oceanides. And when I
chanced to catch sight of one of these musicians, passing from one leaf
underneath another, there was so little apparent connection between it
and its songs that I could not believe I was seeing their source in that
humble little body, as it hopped, surprised and unseeing. The carriage
could not take us right to the church. I made it stop on the way out of
Quetteholme and said good-bye to Albertine. For she had alarmed me by
saying about this church, as about other monuments and about certain
paintings: ‘It’d be such a pleasure to see it with you!’ That was a
pleasure I did not feel capable of giving. I felt it in front of
beautiful things only if I was alone, or pretended to be so, and was
silent. But since she had thought she would be able to experience,
thanks to me, artistic sensations that cannot be communicated in this
way, I found it wiser to tell her that I was leaving her, would come to
fetch her at the end of the day, but that meanwhile I needed to go back
with the carriage to pay a call on Mme Verdurin or the Cambremers, or
even to spend an hour with Mama in Balbec, but never any further. The
first times, at least. For Albertine having once said to me out of
caprice: ‘It’s a nuisance that nature has arranged things so badly and
put Saint-Jean-de-la-Haise on one side and La Raspelière on the other,
so that you’re incarcerated for the whole day in the place that you’ve
chosen’, as soon as I had received the toque and the veil, I ordered, as
my ill-fortune would have it, a motor-car in Saint-Fargeau (_Sanctus
Ferreolus_, according to the _curé_’s book). Albertine, whom I had kept
in ignorance, and who had come to fetch me, was surprised to hear the
throb of the engine in front of the hotel and overjoyed when she learned
that the car was for us. I made her come upstairs to my room for a
moment. She was jumping for joy. ‘Are we going to pay a call on the
Verdurins? – Yes, but it would be better not to go there dressed like
that since you’re going to have your car. Here, you’ll look better in
these.’ And I brought out the toque and veil, which I had hidden. ‘Are
they for me? Oh, you’re so sweet!’ she exclaimed, jumping at my neck.
Aimé encountered us on the stairs and, proud of Albertine’s elegance and
of our means of transport, for such vehicles were something of a rarity
in Balbec, granted himself the pleasure of descending the stairs behind
us. Albertine, wanting to be seen for a moment in her new outfit, asked
me to have the hood folded back, which we could lower later on so as to
have greater freedom together. ‘Come on, said Aimé to the mechanic, whom
he did not in fact know and who had not stirred, didn’t you hear them
say to fold the hood back?’ For Aimé, educated in the ways of the world
by life in a hotel, where he had moreover achieved an eminent rank, was
not as shy as the cab-driver, for whom Françoise was a ‘lady’; despite
the lack of any earlier introduction, he addressed plebeians whom he had
never met as _tu_, without your quite knowing whether this was
aristocratic disdain on his part or a fraternizing with the people. ‘I’m
not free, replied the chauffeur, who did not know me. I was ordered for
Mademoiselle Simonet. I can’t drive Monsieur.’ Aimé gave a guffaw: ‘Come
on, you great oaf, he replied to the mechanic, whom he at once
convinced, this is Mademoiselle Simonet in fact and Monsieur, who is
ordering you to fold your hood back, is in fact your employer.’ And
since Aimé, although personally not feeling any sympathy for Albertine,
was, on account of me, proud of the outfit she was wearing, he whispered
to the chauffeur: ‘You’d be happy to drive a princess like her every day
if you could, wouldn’t you!’ On this first occasion, it was not I alone
who was able to go to La Raspelière, as I did on other days while
Albertine was painting; she wanted to go with me. She intended for us to
stop here and there along the way, but thought it impossible to start by
going to Saint-Jean-de-la-Haise, that is to say in a different
direction, and to make an excursion that seemed meant for another day.
She learned on the contrary from the mechanic that nothing could be
simpler than to go to Saint-Jean, where he would be in twenty minutes,
and where we could remain, if we wanted, for several hours, or push on
much further, for from Quetteholme to La Raspelière he would not take
more than thirty-five minutes. We realized this the moment the car
leaped forward and in a single bound covered twenty paces of an
excellent horse. Distances are simply the ratio of space to time and
vary with it. We express the difficulty that we have in getting to a
place in a system of leagues and kilometres, which becomes false the
moment that difficulty decreases. The art of distance, too, is modified,
since a village that had seemed to be in a different world from some
other village, becomes its neighbour in a landscape whose dimensions
have altered. At all events, learning that there perhaps exists a
universe in which 2 and 2 make 5, and where a straight line is not the
shortest distance between two points, would have surprised Albertine
much less than hearing the mechanic tell her that it was easy to go in
one afternoon to Saint-Jean and to La Raspelière. Douville and
Quetteholme, Saint-Mars-le-Vieux and Saint-Mars-le-Vêtu, Gourville and
Balbec-le-Vieux, Tourville and Féterne, prisoners hitherto as
hermetically locked away in the cells of separate days as Méséglise and
Guermantes of old, and on which the same pair of eyes could not rest in
a single afternoon, released now by the giant in the seven-league boots,
came to congregate around our tea-time, their towers and their belfries,
and their old gardens, which the nearby wood had been eager to disclose.

Having arrived at the foot of the corniche road, the car climbed it in a
single movement, with a continuous sound, like a knife being ground,
while the sea dropped away and broadened out beneath us. The ancient
rustic houses of Montsurvent came rushing up, clutching their vines and
rosebushes tightly to them; the pine trees of La Raspelière, more
agitated than when the evening wind got up, ran off in all directions to
avoid us, and a new manservant whom I had never seen before came to open
the door to us on the front steps, while the gardener’s son, betraying a
precocious aptitude, gazed hungrily at the driving seat. As it was not a
Monday, we did not know whether we would find Mme Verdurin, for except
on that day, when she was ‘at home’, it was unwise to call on her
without warning. No doubt she stayed in ‘in principle’, but this
expression, which Mme Swann had used in the days when she, too, was
attempting to form her little clan and attract a clientèle without
having to stir, even though this often failed to pay its way, and which
she translated mistakenly into ‘on principle’, simply meant ‘as a
general rule’, that is to say, with numerous exceptions. For not only
did Mme Verdurin like going out, but she carried her duties as a hostess
to extremes, and when she had had company for lunch, immediately after
the coffee, the liqueurs and the cigarettes (despite the first torpor
from the heat and from having to digest, when they would have preferred
to watch the Jersey packet passing across the enamel sea through the
foliage on the terrace), the programme included a series of excursions
in the course of which the guests, forcibly installed in carriages, were
taken willy-nilly to one or other of the viewpoints that abound round
Douville. This second part of the entertainment was not, however (the
effort of getting up and climbing into the carriage having been
achieved), found any less attractive by guests already prepared, by the
succulent dishes, the fine wines or the sparkling cider, to let
themselves be easily intoxicated by the purity of the breeze and the
magnificence of the beauty spots. Mme Verdurin showed these off to
strangers a little as if they were (more or less distant) annexes of her
own property, which you could not fail to go and see once you came to
lunch with her and which, conversely, you would not have known about had
you not been entertained by the Patronne. This pretension, of arrogating
to herself the sole rights to their excursions, as to Morel’s and, in
the old days, Dechambre’s playing, and of constraining the landscape to
form part of the little clan, was not, however, as absurd as it may at
first seem. Mme Verdurin made fun of the lack of taste which, as she saw
it, the Cambremers had shown in the furnishing of La Raspelière and the
arrangement of the garden, as well as in the excursions they took, or
made others take, in the neighbourhood. Just as, according to her, La
Raspelière had only begun to be what it should have been since it became
the asylum of the little clan, so she declared that the Cambremers,
forever retracing in their barouche, along the railway line, beside the
sea, the one unpleasant road to be found in the vicinity, had always
lived in the district but did not know it. There was some truth in this
assertion. From routine, a lack of imagination and a want of curiosity
about a region that seemed trite for being so close by, the Cambremers
only ever left home to visit the same places and by the same roads. To
be sure, they laughed heartily at the Verdurins for presuming to teach
them about their own neighbourhood. But had they been cornered, they,
and even their coachman, would have been incapable of taking us to the
splendid, slightly secret, places to which M. Verdurin conducted us,
here lifting the gate into a private but abandoned property, where
others would not have felt free to venture; there getting down from the
carriage in order to follow a lane that was not negotiable, but always
with the certain reward of a marvellous landscape. Let me say for the
rest that the garden at La Raspelière was in some sense a summation of
all the excursions one could make for many kilometres around. First of
all on account of its commanding situation, overlooking the valley on
one side, and the sea on the other, and then because, even on the one
side, that of the sea for example, clearings had been created amidst the
trees, so that from here you took in one horizon, from there a different
one. At each of these viewpoints, there was a garden seat; you went and
sat by turns on that from which you could make out Balbec, or Parville,
or Douville. In one direction even, seats had been placed more or less
above the sheer cliff, and a little way back from it. From these, you
had a foreground of greenery and a horizon that already seemed the
vastest possible, but which became infinitely larger if, by continuing
along a small path, you went as far as the next seat, from which you
took in the whole amphitheatre of the sea. Here you could perceive the
precise sound made by the waves, which did not, on the other hand,
penetrate to the more sunken parts of the garden, from where the waves
still allowed themselves to be seen, but no longer heard. For our hosts,
these places of repose at La Raspelière bore the name of ‘views’. And
indeed, they had gathered round the house the best ‘views’ of the
neighbouring villages, beaches and woodlands, glimpsed much reduced by
the distance, like Hadrian assembling in his villa scale reproductions
of the most celebrated monuments from various provinces. The name that
accompanied the word ‘view’ was not necessarily that of a place on the
coast, but often on the opposite side of the bay, which you could make
out and which had preserved a certain relief despite the extensiveness
of the panorama. Just as you might take down a volume from M. Verdurin’s
shelves to go and read for an hour at ‘the Balbec view’, so, if the
weather was clear, you went to have liqueurs at ‘the Rivebelle view’, on
condition, however, that there was not too much wind, for, despite the
trees planted on either side, the air there was keen. To come back to
the excursions by carriage that Mme Verdurin used to organize in the
afternoons, if, on her return, the Patronne found the cards of some
society person who was ‘passing along the coast’, she pretended to be
overjoyed, but was desolate at having missed their visit and (although
they might have come only to see ‘the house’ or to meet for a day with a
woman whose artistic salon in Paris was celebrated, but unfre-quentable)
quickly made M. Verdurin invite them to dinner for the following
Wednesday. As, frequently, the tourist was obliged to leave before then,
or was afraid of returning late at night, Mme Verdurin had agreed that
on Saturdays, she was always to be met with at tea-time. There were not
so very many of these tea-parties, and I had known more brilliant ones
in Paris at the Princesse de Guermantes’s, Mme de Gallifet’s or Mme
d’Arpajon’s. But then this was no longer Paris and for me the charm of
the setting reacted not only on the attractions of the gathering but on
the quality of the visitors. The encounter with some society person
which, in Paris, afforded me no pleasure at all, but which, at La
Raspelière, where he had come from some way off via Féterne or the
Forest of Chantepie, changed in character and significance, became an
agreeable incident. Now and again it was someone I knew perfectly well
and would not have taken a single step to meet again at the Swanns’. But
his name had a different ring to it on these cliffs, like that of an
actor, whom you often hear in a theatre, appearing on the playbills, in
a different colour, for some unscheduled or gala performance, where his
celebrity is suddenly magnified by the unexpectedness of the context.
Since, in the country, there is no standing on ceremony, the society
person would often take it upon himself to bring the friends with whom
he was staying, emphasizing to Mme Verdurin in an undertone by way of an
excuse that he could not leave them behind, living as he was in the
house; to his hosts, in return, he made out that it was as a sort of
courtesy that he was offering to introduce them to this distraction,
amidst the monotony of seaside life, of going into a centre of the mind,
of touring a magnificent house and of eating an excellent tea. This at
once made up a gathering of several half-worthy individuals; and if a
small patch of garden with a few trees, which would look mean in the
country, acquires an extraordinary charm in the avenue Gabriel or the
rue de Monceau, where multi-millionaires alone can treat themselves to
one, inversely, noblemen who take a back seat at a Paris soirée acquired
their full value on Monday afternoons at La Raspelière. No sooner seated
around the table, covered with a cloth embroidered in red on which,
beneath the trumeaux painted in camaieu, they were served _galettes_,
Normandy _feuilletés_, boat-shaped tarts filled with cherries, like
coral pearls, and ‘diplomats’,⁸ than these guests at once underwent,
from their closeness to the deep bowl of azure on to which the windows
gave and which one could not help seeing at the same time, an
alteration, a profound transmutation which turned them into something
more precious. What was more, even before having seen them, when you
came to Mme Verdurin’s on a Monday, the people who in Paris looked only
with a weariness born of habit at the elegant turn-outs drawn up in
front of a sumptuous _hôtel_, felt their hearts beat faster at the sight
of two or three wretched traps halted in front of La Raspelière, beneath
the tall pine trees. No doubt it was because the rustic setting was
different and that, thanks to this transposition, your social
impressions had been refreshed. It was also because the miserable
vehicle hired in order to go and visit Mme Verdurin evoked a beautiful
drive and a costly ‘arrangement’ reached with a coachman who had
demanded ‘so much’ for the whole day. But the faint stirrings of
curiosity felt towards new arrivals, as yet impossible to distinguish,
derived also from the fact that everyone asked themselves ‘Who’s it
going to be?’, a question that was hard to answer, not knowing who might
have arrived to spend a week at the Cambremers’ or elsewhere, but which
we always like to put to ourselves in these solitary, rural existences,
in which the encounter with a human being you have not seen for a long
time, or the introduction to someone you do not know, ceases from being
the tiresome affair it is living in Paris, and makes a delightful
interruption in the empty space of lives that are too isolated, in which
even the arrival of the postman becomes a pleasure. And the day when we
arrived by motor-car at La Raspelière, since it was not a Monday, M. and
Mme Verdurin must have fallen victim to that need to see company which
troubles both men and women, and makes the invalid who has been shut
away in isolation, far from his family, to get cured, long to throw
himself from the window. For the new servant, who was more mobile, and
familiarized already with such expressions, having answered that ‘if
Madame had not gone out she must be at “the Douville view”, that he
would go and find out’, he at once returned to say that she would
receive us. We found her looking a little dishevelled, for she had come
from the garden, the farmyard and the kitchen-garden, where she had gone
to feed her peacocks and her chickens, to look for eggs, and to pick
flowers and fruit for ‘her table runner’, a reminder, in miniature, of
one of her garden walks; but on the table it conferred the distinction
of making it support only things that were useful and good to eat; for
around the other gifts from the garden that were the pears and the
whipped egg whites, there rose the tall stems of viper’s bugloss, pinks,
roses and coreopsis, between which were to be seen, as if between
flowering signposts, through the window-panes, the boats going past out
to sea. From the surprise that M. and Mme Verdurin displayed, breaking
off from arranging the flowers in order to receive the visitors who had
been announced, on seeing that these visitors were none other than
Albertine and myself, I could tell that the new servant, full of zeal
but not as yet familiar with my name, had repeated it wrongly and that
Mme Verdurin, hearing the name of unknown guests, had nonetheless said
for them to come in, feeling a need to see anyone at all. And the new
servant was studying the spectacle from the doorway in order to
understand what role we played in the household. Then he went off at a
run, with long strides, for he had been taken on only the day before.
Once Albertine had shown off her toque and her veil to the Verdurins,
she gave me a look to remind me that we did not have too much time ahead
of us for what we wished to do. Mme Verdurin wanted us to wait for tea,
but we refused, when all of a sudden a plan was unveiled which would
have reduced to nothing all the pleasures I had been promising myself
from my outing with Albertine: the Patronne, unable to make up her mind
to leave us, or perhaps to allow a new diversion to elude her, wanted to
go back with us. Long accustomed to the fact that offers of this kind on
her part did not give pleasure, and being uncertain probably whether
this one would cause us any, she concealed the diffidence that she felt
in making it beneath an excessive self-assurance, and not even looking
as though she supposed there to be any doubt as to our answer, she asked
us no questions, but said to her husband, referring to Albertine and me,
as if she were doing us a favour: ‘I’ll bring them back!’ At the same
time, there was applied to her lips a smile that did not belong to her
personally, a smile I had already seen on certain people when they said
to Bergotte, with a knowing air: ‘I’ve bought your book, it’s
tremendous’, one of those collective, universal smiles that, when they
have need of them – just as we make use of the railway and of removal
vans – individuals borrow, except for a few ultra-refined ones, such as
Swann or M. de Charlus, on whose lips I have never seen that particular
smile settle. From that moment on, my visit was poisoned. I made a
pretence of not having understood. After a moment, it became obvious
that M. Verdurin would be of the party. ‘But M. Verdurin’ll find it very
long, I said. – No, no, replied Mme Verdurin with a cheerful,
condescending expression, he says it’ll amuse him greatly to retrace
with young people the road he travelled so often in the old days; if
need be he can get up next to the driver, that doesn’t frighten him, and
we’ll come quietly back together by the train, like a good husband and
wife. See, he looks delighted.’ She seemed to be talking about some
great painter, old but full of bonhomie, who, younger than the young,
finds delight in scrawling likenesses to get a laugh from his
grandchildren. What added to my unhappiness was that Albertine seemed
not to share it but to find it fun to drive all round the countryside
like this with the Verdurins. For my own part, the pleasure I had
promised myself I was going to take with her was so imperious that I
refused to allow the Patronne to spoil it; I invented falsehoods that
Mme Verdurin’s irritating threats had made excusable, but which
Albertine, alas, contradicted. ‘But we’ve a call to make, I said. – What
call? asked Albertine. – I’ll explain, it’s essential. – All right, we
shall wait for you,’ said Mme Verdurin, resigned to anything. At the
last minute, my anguish at feeling a long-desired happiness being
snatched away from me lent me the courage to be impolite. I refused
point-blank, alleging in Mme Verdurin’s ear that, because of some
trouble that Albertine had had, about which she wished to consult me, I
had absolutely to be alone with her. The Patronne assumed a look of
fury: ‘Right, we shan’t come,’ she said to me, in a voice quivering with
anger. I sensed that she was so angry that, to seem to be giving way a
little: ‘But we might have been able to… – No, she went on, more furious
still, once I’ve said no, it’s no.’ I thought I was in her bad books,
but she called us back in the doorway to advise us not to ‘let her down’
on Wednesday next, and not to come in that contraption, which was
dangerous in the dark, but by the train with all the little group, and
she got the car to stop when it was already going down the sloping
driveway into the gardens because the new servant had forgotten to put
into the hood the square of tart and the shortbreads she had had packed
up for us. We set off again escorted for a moment by the little houses
that had come hurrying up with their flowers. The face of the locality
seemed quite altered, so far is the notion of space from playing the
major role in the topographical image of each one that we create for
ourselves. I have said that the notion of time divides them further. Nor
is it alone. Certain scenes that we see always isolated seem to us to
lack any common measure with the rest, almost outside the world, like
the people whom we have known at special periods in our lives, in the
Army, during our childhood, whom we connect with nothing. The year of my
first stay in Balbec, there was an eminence to which Mme de Villeparisis
liked to take us because from it you could see nothing but the water and
the woodland, and which was called Beaumont. As the road she made them
take to go there, which she thought the prettiest because of its old
trees, was all uphill, her carriage was obliged to go at a walk and took
a very long time. The top once reached, we got down, we took a short
walk, we got back into the carriage and we returned by the same road,
without having encountered a single village or a single house. I knew
that Beaumont was something very curious, very distant, very high up,
but I had no idea in which direction it lay, never having taken the road
for Beaumont to go anywhere else; it took in any case a long time to get
there by carriage. It obviously formed part of the same _département_
(or the same province) as Balbec, but for me was situated on a different
plane, and enjoyed a special privilege of extraterritoriality. But the
motor-car, which is no respecter of mystery, after passing Incarville,
whose houses I could still see before me, and as we were descending the
cross-gradient which leads to Parville (_Paterna villa_), catching sight
of the sea from the piece of level ground on which we were, I asked what
this place was called, and before the chauffeur had even answered, I
recognized Beaumont, near to which I had thus passed without realizing
every time I took the little railway, for it was two minutes from
Parville. Just like an officer in my regiment, who might have struck me
as someone special, too kindly and simple to be from a grand family, too
remote and mysterious to be simply from a grand family, and who I
learned was the brother-in-law or cousin of one or other lot of people
where I had been to dinner, so Beaumont, linked all of a sudden to
places from which I had thought it quite distinct, lost its mystery and
took up its place in the region, leading me to reflect in terror that
Mme Bovary and La Sanseverina⁹would perhaps have struck me as creatures
like any other had I come across them anywhere except in the enclosed
atmosphere of a novel. It might seem as though my love of fantastic
journeys by train should have prevented me from sharing Albertine’s
wonderment at the motor-car, which takes us, even an invalid, where we
will, and prevents us – as I had been doing up until now – from
regarding their location as the individual sign, the irreplaceable
essence of immovable beauties. And doubtless the motor-car did not make
of this location, as the railway once had, when I had come from Paris to
Balbec, an objective abstracted from the contingencies of normal life,
ideal almost when you set off and which, remaining so on your arrival,
the arrival in that great house where nobody lives but which simply
bears the name of the town and the station, seems finally to promise its
accessibility, just as it is its materialization. No, the motor-car did
not carry us in this fantastic way into a town that we saw first of all
as the whole encapsulated in its name, and with the illusions of a
spectator in the theatre. It made us go backstage into the streets,
stopping to ask directions of an inhabitant. But as compensation for
this very familiar progression, you have the very hesitations of the
chauffeur, unsure of his road and turning back, the _chassés-croisés_ of
the perspective, causing a château to play hide-and-seek with a hill, a
church and the sea, as you approach, huddle in vain though it may
beneath its centuries-old foliage; these ever tightening circles that
the motor-car describes around a fascinated town that runs off in all
directions in order to escape it and on to which it finally swoops down
vertically, in the bottom of the valley, where the town lies prostrate;
so that the motor-car, having seemed to strip the location, this unique
point, of the mystery of the express train, gives us, on the contrary,
the impression of discovering it, of ourselves determining it as if with
a compass, of helping us to feel, with a more lovingly exploratory hand,
with a more delicate precision, its true geometry, the beautiful
‘measure of the earth’.

What I did not alas know at that time, and only learned more than two
years later, was that one of the chauffeur’s customers was M. de
Charlus, and that Morel, responsible for paying him and keeping part of
the money for himself (by getting the chauffeur to triple or quintuple
the number of kilometres), had struck up a close friendship with him
(while making out he did not know him in front of company) and used his
vehicle for distant errands. Had I known this at the time, and that the
confidence which the Verdurins soon felt in this chauffeur had derived,
unbeknownst to them, therefrom, perhaps many of the sorrows of my life
in Paris, the following year, many of my misfortunes relative to
Albertine, might have been avoided; but I had not the least suspicion of
it. In themselves, the drives that M. de Charlus took in the car with
Morel were of no direct interest to me. They were in any case confined
most often to lunch or dinner in a restaurant along the coast, where M.
de Charlus passed for a penniless old domestic and Morel, whose business
it was to settle the bill, for an over-generous member of the gentry. I
shall recount one of these dinners, which may give an idea of the
others. It was in an oblong-shaped restaurant in Saint-Mars-le-Vêtu.
‘Couldn’t they remove this?’ M. de Charlus asked Morel, as if to an
intermediary, so as not to address the waiters directly. By ‘this' he
denoted three wilted roses with which a well-intentioned _maître
d’hôtel_ had thought fit to decorate the table. ‘Yes…, said Morel,
embarrassed. You don’t like roses? – I am proving on the contrary by the
request in question that I do like them, since there are no roses here
(Morel seemed surprised), though in point of fact I do not like them a
lot. I am somewhat sensitive to names; and as soon as a rose is at all
beautiful, one finds out that it is called the Baronne de Rothschild or
the Maréchale Niel,¹⁰ which puts one right off. Do you like names? Have
you found some pretty titles for your little concert pieces? – One of
them’s called _Poème triste_. – That’s ghastly, snapped M. de Charlus in
a high-pitched voice that was like a slap in the face. Did I not ask for
champagne?’ he said to the _maître d’hôtel_, who supposed that he had
brought some, setting two glasses filled with sparkling wine down beside
the two customers. ‘But Monsieur… – Remove this filth, which bears no
relation to even the worst champagne. It’s the vomitive known as “cup”
where they generally trail three rotting strawberries in a mixture of
vinegar and seltzer water… Yes, he went on, turning back to Morel, you
appear not to know what a title is. And even in the interpretation of
what you play best, you seem not to notice the mediumistic aspects of
the thing. – You’re saying?’ asked Morel who, having understood not the
first thing in what the Baron had said, was afraid of being deprived of
some useful piece of information, such as, for example, an invitation to
lunch. M. de Charlus having omitted to take ‘You’re saying?’ as a
question, Morel, in consequence, having received no response, thought he
should change the conversation and turn it in a sensual direction: ‘I
say, the little blonde who’s selling the flowers you don’t like; another
one who’s bound to have a young friend. And the old woman eating at the
table down the end, too. – But how do you know all this?’ asked M. de
Charlus, amazed by Morel’s prescience. ‘Oh, I can see through them in an
instant. If the two of us were walking in a crowd, you’d see I’m never
wrong twice.’ And whoever had been observing Morel at that moment, with
his girlish look in the midst of his masculine beauty, would have
understood the obscure divination which marked him out to certain women
no less than them to him. He was keen to supplant Jupien, vaguely
desirous of adding to his ‘salary’ the income that, so he believed, the
waistcoat-maker was extracting from the Baron. ‘And I’m even more expert
where gigolos are concerned, I’d avoid you making any mistakes. It’ll
soon be the Balbec fair, we’d find lots of things. And then in Paris!
You’d have fun, you’ll see.’ But the hereditary wariness of a servant
led him to give the sentence on which he had already begun a different
twist. With the result that M. de Charlus thought it still had to do
with girls. ‘You know, said Morel, anxious to excite the Baron’s senses
in a manner that he adjudged to be less compromising for himself
(although it was in point of fact more immoral), my dream would be to
find a perfectly innocent young girl, make her fall in love with me and
take her virginity.’ M. de Charlus could not refrain from tenderly
pinching Morel’s ear, but added artlessly: ‘What good would that do you?
If you took her maidenhead, you’d certainly be obliged to marry her. –
Marry her?’ exclaimed Morel, who felt the Baron must be drunk, or else
was oblivious of the man, more scrupulous all things considered than he
imagined, to whom he was speaking. ‘Marry her? Rubbish! I’d promise, but
the minute the little operation had been brought to fruition, I’d ditch
her the same evening.’ M. de Charlus was in the habit, when a fiction
was able to produce in him a moment’s sensual pleasure, of giving it his
approval, while being prepared to withdraw this altogether a few moments
later, once the pleasure had worn off. ‘Really, you’d do that?’ he said
to Morel, laughing and holding him all the tighter. ‘Would I not!’ said
Morel, seeing that he was not displeasing the Baron by continuing
genuinely to explain what was indeed one of his desires. ‘It’s
dangerous, said M. de Charlus. – I’d pack my bags in advance and clear
off without leaving an address. – And what about me? asked M. de
Charlus. I’d take you with me, of course,’ Morel hastened to say, who
had not thought about what might become of the Baron, who was the least
of his concerns. ‘Listen, there’s a little one who’d appeal to me
greatly, as far as that goes, a young seamstress who has her shop in M.
le Duc’s house. – Jupien’s daughter!¹¹ exclaimed the Baron, as the
_sommelier_ entered. Oh, never!’ he added, whether because the presence
of a third party had cast a chill, or because, even in these sorts of
black Mass during which he took pleasure in defiling the most sacred
things, he could not bring himself to involve people for whom he felt
friendship. ‘Jupien’s a good fellow, the little one is charming, it
would be dreadful to cause them any unhappiness.’ Morel sensed that he
had gone too far and fell silent, but his gaze continued to fix itself,
in the void, on the girl in front of whom one day he had wanted me to
address him as ‘_cher grand artiste_’, and from whom he had ordered a
waistcoat. The young girl was very hard-working and had not taken any
holiday, but I have learned since that, while the violinist was in the
neighbourhood of Balbec, she could not leave off thinking of his
handsome face, ennobled by the fact that, having seen Morel with me, she
had taken him for a ‘gentleman’.

‘I never heard Chopin play, said the Baron, yet I could have done, I
took lessons with Stamati,¹² but he forbade me from going to hear the
master of the _Nocturnes_ at my aunt Chimay’s. – What a silly thing to
do! exclaimed Morel. – On the contrary, replied M. de Charlus sharply,
in a shrill voice. It was proof of his intelligence. He’d realized I was
a “natural” and that I’d come under Chopin’s influence. It doesn’t
matter because I gave up music when I was quite young, like everything
else for that matter. Besides, one can use one’s imagination, he added,
in a protracted nasal drawl, there are always people who did hear, who
can give you an idea. But anyway, Chopin was only a pretext for getting
back to the mediumistic aspect that you’re neglecting.’

It will be observed that, after an interpolation in the vulgar tongue,
that of M. de Charlus had abruptly become once more as precious and
haughty as usual. The fact was that the idea that Morel would have no
compunction in ‘ditching’ a girl he had violated had suddenly caused him
to experience total pleasure. From that moment on, his senses were
appeased for a time and the sadist (who truly was mediumistic) who had
momentarily taken the place of M. de Charlus had fled and handed the
floor back to the real M. de Charlus, full of artistic refinement,
sensitivity and kindness. ‘The other day you played the transcription
for piano of Quartet No. 15, which is absurd in itself because nothing
could be less pianistic. It’s meant for people who get earache from the
glorious Deaf One’s over-taut strings. Yet it’s that same almost sour
mysticism which is divine. At all events, you played it very badly,
altering all the tempi. You need to play it as if you were composing it:
the young Morel, afflicted with a temporary deafness and a non-existent
genius, remains motionless for an instant; then, seized by the sacred
frenzy, he plays, he composes the opening bars; then, exhausted by this
attempt to cast a spell, he collapses, letting his pretty lock of hair
fall to please Mme Verdurin, and takes the time, in addition, to
re-create the prodigious quantity of grey matter that he called upon for
the Pythic objectification; then, having recovered his strength, and
seized by a fresh, supereminent inspiration, he springs towards the
sublime, inexhaustible phrase that the Berlin virtuoso (we believe M. de
Charlus was here referring to Mendelssohn) was unwearyingly to imitate.
It’s in this, the one truly transcendent and enlivening manner, that I
shall make you play in Paris.’ When M. de Charlus gave him advice of
this nature, Morel was much more alarmed than on seeing the _maître
d’hôtel_ remove his spurned roses and ‘cup’, for he asked himself
anxiously what effect this might have on the ‘class’. But he could not
dwell on these reflections for M. de Charlus was saying to him
imperiously: ‘Ask the _maître d’hôtel_ if he’s got any _bons Chrétiens_.
– _Bons Chrétiens_? I don’t understand.’ – As you can see, we’ve got to
the fruit, it’s a pear. You can be sure Mme de Cambremer’ll have some at
her house, because the Comtesse d’Escarbagnas, which she is, used to
have them. M. Thibaudier sends them to her and she says: “Here’s a
really beautiful _bon Chrétien_.”¹³ – No, I didn’t know. – I can see for
that matter that you don’t know anything. If you haven’t even read
Molière… Oh well, since you can’t know how to order any more than the
rest, quite simply ask for a pear that’s in fact picked near here, the
_Louise-bonne d’Avranches_. – The…? – Wait, since you’re so awkward,
I’ll ask myself for others which I prefer: _Maître d’hôtel_, do you have
any _doyenné des comices_? Charlie, you must read the ravishing passage
written about that pear by the Duchesse Emilie de Clermont-Tonnerre. –
No, Monsieur, I don’t have any. – Do you have any _triomphe de
Jodoignes_? – No, Monsieur. – Any _Virginie-dallet_? Any _passe-Colmar_?
No? Oh well, since you don’t have anything we shall leave. The _Duchesse
d’Angoulêmes_ aren’t yet ripe; come, Charlie, we’re going.’
Unfortunately for M. de Charlus, his lack of common sense, and perhaps
the chasteness of the relationship he probably enjoyed with Morel, made
him rack his brains from that time on to overwhelm the violinist with
strange acts of kindness that the latter could not understand and to
which his nature, wild in its way, yet also mean and ungrateful, could
respond only with an ever-increasing indifference or violence, which
plunged M. de Charlus – once so proud, now quite timid – into fits of
genuine despair. We shall see how, in the smallest things, Morel, who
saw himself as having become an infinitely more important M. de Charlus,
had understood amiss, by taking them literally, the Baron’s arrogant
teachings concerning the aristocracy. For the present let me simply say,
while Albertine is waiting for me in Saint-Jean-de-la-Haise, that if
there was one thing that Morel set above the nobility (and this was, as
a principle, noble enough, especially in someone whose pleasure it was
to go in search of young girls – ‘without anyone being any the wiser’ –
with the chauffeur), it was his artistic reputation and what his violin
class might think. It was ugly no doubt that, because he felt M. de
Charlus belonged exclusively to him, he should have appeared to disown
him, to make fun of him, just as, the moment I had promised to keep the
secret of his father’s duties at my great-uncle’s, he treated me with
lordly disdain. On the other hand, his name as an artist graduated from
the Conservatoire, Morel, seemed to him superior to a ‘name’. And when
M. de Charlus, in his dreams of Platonic affection, tried to make him
accept a title from his own family, Morel energetically refused.

When Albertine found it more sensible to stay in Saint-Jean-de-la-Haise
to paint, I would take the car, and it was not just to Gourville and
Féterne, but to Saint-Mars-le-Vieux and as far as Criquetot, that I was
able to go before returning to collect her. While pretending to have
other things than her on my mind, and to be obliged to desert her for
other pleasures, I thought only about her. Very often, I went no further
than the broad plain that overlooks Gourville, and since it a little
resembles that which begins above Combray, in the direction of
Méséglise, even when quite some distance from Albertine, I had the joy
of reflecting that, though my gaze might not be able to go all the way
to her, the powerful but mild sea breeze that was passing beside me
would outreach it, would go hurrying down, with nothing that might
arrest it, all the way to Quetteholme, and come to stir the branches of
the trees that bury Saint-Jean-de-la-Haise beneath their foliage,
caressing the face of my loved one, and thus throw up a double link
between her and me in this indefinitely enlarged, yet safe, retreat,
like in those games when two children find themselves momentarily out of
sight and earshot of one another, yet, though separated, remain joined.
I returned by the roads from which you can see the sea, and where once,
before it appeared between the branches, I used to close my eyes to
reflect that what I was about to see was indeed the plaintive ancestress
of the earth, pursuing, as in the days when no human beings as yet
existed, its crazed, immemorial agitation. Now, they were nothing more
for me than the means of going to rejoin Albertine; when I recognized
them, quite unchanged, knowing how far they would run straight ahead,
and where they would bend, I remembered that I had followed them
thinking of Mlle de Stermaria, and that I had been in just the same
hurry to find Albertine again in Paris, when going down the streets
along which Mme de Guermantes had passed; they had taken on for me the
profound monotony and the moral significance of a sort of line that my
character was following. It was natural, but not thereby a matter of
indifference; they reminded me that my fate was to pursue only phantoms,
beings whose reality lay in large part in my imagination; there are
human beings indeed – and this had been my own case since my early days
– for whom whatever has a fixed value, recognizable by others, fortune,
success, a high position, counts for nothing; what they must have is
phantoms. To this they sacrifice all the rest, use every possible means,
bend all their efforts, to encounter some phantom. But the latter is not
long in vanishing; then they pursue some other phantom, while being
ready to return later to the first one. This was not the first time that
I had gone in search of Albertine, the girl glimpsed that first year in
front of the sea. Other women, it was true, had been interposed between
the Albertine loved on that first occasion and the one whom at present I
hardly ever left; other women, notably the Duchesse de Guermantes. But,
people will say, why agonize so over Gilberte, or go to so much trouble
over Mme de Guermantes, if, having become the latter’s friend, it was
solely in order not to think about her any more, but only about
Albertine? Swann, before his death, might have known the answer, he who
had been a connoisseur of phantoms. These Balbec roads were full of
them, of phantoms pursued, forgotten, sought after afresh, sometimes for
a single interview and so as to touch an unreal life that had at once
made its escape. Reflecting that their trees, pears, apples and
tamarisks would outlive me, I seemed to be receiving from them the
advice finally to set to work while the hour of eternal rest had yet to
sound.

I got out of the car in Quetteholme, ran down the steep sunken lane,
crossed the stream by a plank and found Albertine painting in front of
the church, which was all turrets, thorny and red, in blossom like a
rose-bush. The tympanum alone was smooth; and on the smiling surface of
the stone there appeared angels, who continued, before our
twentieth-century couple, to celebrate, taper in hand, the ceremonies of
the thirteenth. They it was whose portrait Albertine was attempting to
paint on her prepared canvas and, in imitation of Elstir, she was making
long strokes with the brush, attempting to obey the noble rhythm which,
the great master had told her, made these angels so different from all
those that he knew. Then she gathered up her things. Leaning one against
the other, we re-ascended the sunken lane, leaving the little church as
quiet as if it had not seen us, to listen to the constant sound of the
stream. Soon the car was speeding along, making us take a different road
back from the one coming. We passed in front of
Marcouville-l’Orgueilleuse. Over its church, half new, half restored,
the declining sun had spread a patina as lovely as that of the
centuries. Through it, the great bas-reliefs seemed to be seen only
beneath a fluid coating, half liquid, half luminous; the Holy Virgin,
Saint Elizabeth, Saint Joachim, were still swimming in the impalpable
eddies, almost in the dry, on the surface of the water or the sunlight.
Looming suddenly into view in a warm dust, the numerous modern statues
rose on their columns, half-way up the golden veils of the sunset. In
front of the church, a tall cypress seemed to be in a sort of
consecrated enclosure. We got out for a moment to look at it, and took a
few steps. As much as of her limbs, Albertine was directly conscious of
her Italian straw toque and her silk scarf (which for her were no lesser
a seat of feelings of well-being), and received from them, as we walked
round the church, another kind of impulsion, betrayed by a contentment
that was inert yet which for me had charm; a scarf and toque that were
only a recent, adventitious part of my loved one, but which was already
dear to me and whose wake I followed with my eyes, along the cypress, in
the evening air. She herself could not see it, but suspected that this
elegance was having its effect, for she smiled at me, cocking her head
in harmony with the headgear that completed it: ‘It doesn’t appeal to
me, it’s been restored,’ she said, pointing to the church and
remembering what Elstir had said to her about the precious, the
inimitable beauty of the old stonework. Albertine knew at once how to
recognize a restoration. You could not but be astonished at the sureness
of taste that she already possessed in architecture, instead of the
deplorable taste she had preserved in music. No more than had Elstir did
I like this church, it was without affording me any pleasure that its
sunlit façade had come and set itself down before my eyes, and I had got
out to look at it only as a kindness to Albertine. Yet I found that the
great impressionist was in contradiction with himself; why make a fetish
of the objective architectural value, without taking any account of the
transfiguration of the church in the setting sun? ‘No, I definitely
don’t like it, Albertine said; I like its name of Orgueilleuse. But what
we must remember to ask Brichot is why Saint-Mars is called le Vêtu.
We’ll go next time, won’t we?’ she said, looking at me out of her black
eyes, over which her toque had been pulled down, like her little cap in
the old days. Her veil was floating loose. I got back into the car with
her, glad that the next day we were to go together to Saint-Mars where,
in this torrid weather, when your one thought was of bathing, the two
ancient, salmon-pink belfries, with their diamond-shaped tiles, slightly
out of true and as if palpitating, looked like old, pointed fish,
imbricated with scales, moss-covered and ruddy, which, without appearing
to move, were rising in a blue, transparent water. On leaving
Marcouville, to take a short cut, we forked off at a crossroads where
there is a farm. Sometimes Albertine made us stop there and asked me to
go on my own and fetch, so that she could drink it in the car, some
calvados or cider, which we were assured was not fizzy yet which sprayed
all over us. We sat pressed one against the other. The people from the
farm could barely see Albertine in the closed car, and I gave them back
the bottles; we left again, as if to carry on with our life, the two of
us together, with the lovers’ life which they may have supposed we led,
in which this pause to drink would have been simply one insignificant
moment; a supposition that might have seemed all the less improbable had
they seen us after Albertine had drunk her bottle of cider; she then
indeed seemed unable any longer to tolerate a gap between herself and
me, which normally did not trouble her; under her linen skirt her legs
were pressed against my legs, she brought close to mine cheeks that had
become pallid, hot, and red over the cheekbones, with something burning
and faded about them such as street girls have in the suburbs. At these
times, she changed her voice almost as quickly as her personality, lost
her own in order to assume another, hoarse, brazen, almost crapulous.
Dusk was falling. What a pleasure to feel her against me, with her scarf
and her toque, reminding me that it is always thus, side by side, that
we encounter those who love one another! I perhaps felt love for
Albertine, but did not dare to let her see it, so that if it existed in
me, it could only be as a truth without value until it had been able to
be verified by experience; but it seemed to me unrealizable, and outside
the plane of life. As for my jealousy, it led me to leave Albertine as
seldom as possible, although I knew that it would be cured altogether
only by parting from her for ever. I was even capable of feeling it in
her presence, but then contrived not to allow the circumstances to recur
which had excited it. Thus it was that, on a day of fine weather, we
went to have lunch in Rivebelle. The big glass doors of the dining-room,
and of the corridor-shaped hall which was used for teas, had been
opened, level with the lawns, turned to gold by the sun, of which the
huge luminous restaurant seemed to form part. The waiter with the pink
face and the black hair twisted like a flame, dashed about in this vast
expanse less rapidly than before, for he was no longer a commis but a
_chef de rang_; nevertheless, because of his natural industry, now in
the distance, in the dining-room, and now closer to, but outside,
serving customers who had preferred to eat in the garden, you saw him
first in one place then in another, like the successive statues of a
young god running, some in the – well-lit – interior of a house that
extended into the green lawn, others beneath the foliage, in the bright
light of life in the open air. Momentarily, he was at our side.
Albertine replied distractedly to what I had been saying. She was gazing
at him through widened eyes. For a minute or two, I felt that you could
be close to the person that you love yet not have them with you. They
appeared to be involved in a mysterious tête-à-tête, rendered wordless
by my presence, and the continuation perhaps of former assignations of
which I knew nothing, or simply of a look that he had given her – where
I was the intrusive third party from whom one hides. Even when, after a
violent summons from his superior, he had gone off, Albertine, while
continuing to eat her lunch, appeared to regard the restaurant and
gardens as nothing more than an illuminated running-track, on which
there appeared here and there, against various backgrounds, the running
god with the black hair. For a moment I wondered whether, in order to
follow him, she might not be going to leave me on my own at the table.
But from the days that followed I began to forget this painful
impression once and for all, because I had decided never to return to
Rivebelle, and had made Albertine promise, who assured me that this was
the first time she had been there, that she would never go back. And I
denied that the waiter with the nimble feet had had eyes only for her,
so that she might not believe that my company had deprived her of a
pleasure. It so happened that I did, on occasions, go back to Rivebelle,
but alone, and drank too much, as I had done there before. As I drained
a last glass, I looked at a rosette painted on the white wall, and
transferred on to it the pleasure that I felt. It alone in the world
existed for me; I pursued it, touched it and lost it by turns with my
shifting gaze, and I was indifferent to the future, content with my
rosette, like a butterfly that circles about a butterfly that has
settled, with which it is about to end its life in an act of supreme
voluptuousness. But I thought it dangerous to allow there to take up
residence in me, in however mild a form, a sickness which resembles
those habitual pathological states to which we pay no heed, but which,
should the least accident, unforeseeable but inevitable, befall it,
suffice at once to lend it an extreme gravity. The moment was
particularly well chosen perhaps to renounce a woman whom no very recent
or very acute suffering obliged me to ask for that balm against a
sickness which those who have caused it possess. I was calmed by these
same excursions, which, although I looked on them at the time simply as
an anticipation of a tomorrow which itself, in spite of the longing with
which it filled me, would be no different from the day before, had the
attraction of having been wrenched away from the places where Albertine
had been up until now but where I had not been with her, at her aunt’s,
or at her girl-friends’. The attraction not of a positive joy, but
simply of the allaying of an anxiety, yet very powerful even so. For
within the space of a few days, when I thought back to the farm in front
of which we had drunk our cider, or simply to the few steps we had taken
in front of Saint-Mars-le-Vêtu, remembering that Albertine had walked
beside me under her toque, the sense of her presence added such healing
properties all of a sudden to the indifferent image of the new church,
that at the moment when the sunlit façade came thus and set itself down
of its own accord in my memory, it was like a great soothing compress
that had been applied to my heart. I set Albertine down in Parville, but
only so as to meet her again in the evening and go and stretch out
beside her, in the darkness, on the shore. I did not see her every day,
it is true, yet I was able to tell myself: ‘Were she to recount the
time-table of her life, it’s I still who would have pride of place’; and
we passed long hours on end together, which introduced so sweet an
intoxication into my days that even when, in Parville, she jumped down
from the car that I would be sending back for her in an hour’s time, I
no more felt alone in the car than if, before getting out, she had left
flowers behind. I could have gone without seeing her every day; I would
be happy when I left her, I sensed that the calming effect of this
happiness might endure for several days. But then I would hear
Albertine, as she left me, saying to her aunt or to a girl-friend:
‘Tomorrow at eight-thirty, then. We mustn’t be late, they’ll be ready
from a quarter past eight.’ The conversation of a woman that you love is
like the earth covering a dangerous, subterranean lake; you are
constantly aware of the presence, behind the words, of the penetrating
cold of an invisible sheet of water; here and there it is to be seen
oozing perfidiously out, but the lake itself remains hidden. As soon as
I heard Albertine’s words, my calm was destroyed. I wanted to ask to see
her the next morning, so as to prevent her going to this mysterious
rendez-vous at half past eight, which had been referred to in my
presence only in veiled terms. She would no doubt have obeyed me the
first times, while regretting having to give up her plans; then she
would have discovered my permanent need to disrupt them; I would be the
one from whom everything must be kept. It is of course likely that these
entertainments from which I was excluded amounted to very little, and
that it was perhaps out of a fear that I might find one or other female
guest vulgar or tedious that I was not invited. Unfortunately, this
life, so closely involved with that of Albertine, did not have its
effect only on myself; to me it brought peace of mind; in my mother it
caused anxieties the confession of which destroyed that peace of mind.
As I returned home contented, determined to bring to an end from one day
to the next an existence whose termination I believed depended on my own
volition alone, my mother said to me, hearing me send to the chauffeur
to go and fetch Albertine after dinner: ‘All the money you’re spending!
(Françoise, in her simple and expressive language, put it more
forcefully: “Money burns a hole in your pocket.”) Try, Mama went on, not
to become like Charles de Sévigné, whose mother used to say, “His hand
is a crucible in which money melts.” Besides, I do think you’ve been out
enough with Albertine. I assure you you’re overdoing it, that even she
may find it ridiculous. I’ve been delighted that it takes your mind off
things, I’m not asking you not to see her again, but just so that’s it’s
not impossible to meet one of you without the other.’ My life with
Albertine, a life devoid of great pleasures – as perceived by me at
least – this life that I was counting on changing from one day to the
next, by choosing a moment of calm, suddenly became necessary to me once
again for a time, when it found itself under threat from Mama’s words. I
told my mother that her words had just put back by two months perhaps
the decision that they were demanding, which, but for them, would have
been taken by the end of the week. Mama began to laugh (so as not to
make me unhappy) at the effect that her advice had instantly produced,
and promised not to mention it again so as not to prevent my good
intentions from being revived. But since my grandmother’s death, every
time that Mama allowed herself to laugh, the laughter was cut short
almost before it began, and ended on an almost sobbing expression of
suffering, either out of remorse at having been able for a moment to
forget, or else out of the recrudescence whereby this short-lived
forgetfulness had again revived her cruel preoccupation. But to that
caused by the memory of my grandmother, lodged in my mother like an
_idée fixe_, I sensed that this time another preoccupation had been
added, having to do with myself, and with the fact that my mother
dreaded the consequences of my intimacy with Albertine; an intimacy she
did not dare stand in the way of, however, on account of what I had just
told her. But she did not seem convinced that I was not deceiving
myself. She could remember all those years during which she and my
grandmother had no longer raised the question of my work or of a healthy
form of life, on which, I used to say, only the agitation into which
their exhortations cast me was preventing me from starting, but which,
despite their obedient silence, I had not pursued.

After dinner the car brought Albertine back; there was still a little
daylight left; the air was less hot, but after a burning-hot day we were
both dreaming of unknown forms of coolness; then, to our fevered eyes
the moon appeared, all narrow at first (as on the evening when I had
gone to the Princesse de Guermantes’s and when Albertine had telephoned
me), like the thin, fragile rind, then like the fresh quarter of a fruit
that an invisible knife had begun to peel in the sky. On occasions, it
was I who went to fetch my loved one, a little later in that case; she
was to wait for me in front of the market arcade in Maineville. To start
with, I could not make her out; I was already worried that she might not
be coming, that she had misunderstood. Then I would find her, in her
white blouse with the blue polka dots, jumping into the car beside me
with the light spring more of a young animal than of a girl. And it was
like a dog, again, that she at once began endlessly to fondle me. Once
the darkness was complete and, as the manager of the hotel used to say,
the sky was all skittered with stars, if we did not go for a drive in
the forest with a bottle of champagne, unconcerned by the strollers
still sauntering along the dimly lit esplanade, who would not have been
able to see a thing two paces away on the black sand, we would stretch
out below the dunes; and that same body, in whose suppleness there lived
all the feminine, marine and sportive grace of the girls I had seen that
first time passing across the horizon of the waves, I now held it
pressed tightly against my own, under the same rug, on the very edge of
the motionless sea, divided by a trembling shaft of moonlight; and we
listened to it without wearying and with the same pleasure, whether as
it held its breath, long enough suspended for you to suppose its reflux
had been halted, or as, finally, it exhaled the anticipated but delayed
murmur at our feet. In the end I would take Albertine back to Parville.
Having arrived in front of the house, we had to interrupt our kisses for
fear of being seen; having no desire to go to bed, she would come back
with me as far as Balbec, from where I took her back for a last time to
Parville; in those early days of the motor-car, chauffeurs were men who
went to bed at all hours. In fact, I got home to Balbec only with the
first dampness of early morning, alone this time, but still surrounded
by the presence of my loved one, gorged with a supply of kisses that I
would be long in exhausting. On my table I would find a telegram or a
postcard. It was from Albertine again! She had written them at
Quetteholme while I was off on my own in the car, to tell me that she
was thinking of me. I reread them as I got into bed. Then, above the
curtains, I would see the band of broad daylight and tell myself that we
must be in love after all, to have spent the night kissing one another.
When, the next morning, I saw Albertine on the esplanade, I was so
afraid that she would answer that she was not free that day and could
not agree to my request that we go out together that I delayed for as
long as I could before making it. I was the more concerned in that she
appeared distant and preoccupied; people of her acquaintance were
passing; no doubt she had made plans for that afternoon from which I was
excluded. I looked at her, I looked at that entrancing body, at those
pink features of Albertine’s, raising the enigma of their intentions in
front of me, the unknown decision on which turned the happiness or
unhappiness of my afternoon. It was a whole state of being, a whole
future existence, which had assumed in front of me the fateful,
allegorical form of a girl. And when at last I had come to a decision,
when, with as indifferent an air as I could, I asked: ‘Shall we go off
together this afternoon and this evening?’ and she replied: ‘I’d love
to’, then the whole sudden replacement, in that pink face, of my
prolonged anxiety by a delectable quietude, made more precious to me
still those contours to which I was perpetually indebted for my
well-being, the assuagement we feel after a storm has broken. I repeated
to myself: ‘She’s so sweet, what an adorable creature!’ in an exaltation
less fertile than that owed to intoxication, hardly any more profound
than that of friendship, but much superior to that of life in society.
We cancelled the car only on the days when there was a dinner party at
the Verdurins’, and on those when, Albertine not being free to go out
with me, I took the opportunity to let the people who wished to visit me
know that I would be remaining in Balbec. I authorized Saint-Loup to
come on these days, but on these days alone. For once when he had
arrived without warning, I had preferred to forgo seeing Albertine
rather than risk his meeting her, jeopardizing the state of contented
calm in which I had been for some time now, and reviving my jealousy. I
felt easy in my mind only once Saint-Loup had left again. He therefore
bound himself, regretfully but scrupulously, never to come to Balbec
without a summons from me. In the old days, reflecting enviously on the
hours that Mme de Guermantes spent with him, I had set such great store
by seeing him! People never cease to change position in relation to
ourselves. In the world’s imperceptible but everlasting march, we think
of them as motionless, in a moment of vision, too brief for us to
perceive the motion that is bearing them along. But we need only choose
from our memory two pictures of them taken at different times, yet
sufficiently close together for them not to have changed in themselves,
perceptibly at least, and the difference between the two pictures
measures the displacement they have effected relative to ourselves. He
worried me dreadfully by talking about the Verdurins, I was afraid he
might ask me to have him received there, which would have been enough,
because of the jealousy I would not have ceased to feel, to mar all the
pleasure that I enjoyed there with Albertine. But happily, Robert
admitted that, quite to the contrary, he wished above all not to meet
them. ‘No, he said, I find that type of clerical circle exasperating.’ I
did not at first understand the adjective ‘clerical’ as applied to the
Verdurins, but Saint-Loup’s concluding words enlightened me as to his
thought, and to the concessions to linguistic fashion that one is often
surprised to find adopted by intelligent men. ‘They’re circles, he said,
where they play at being tribes, where they play at being congregations
and chapels. You’re not going to tell me it isn’t a small sect; they’re
all sweetness and light to the people who belong, and couldn’t be more
contemptuous of the ones who don’t. The question isn’t, like for Hamlet,
to be or not to be, but to be one of them or not to be one of them.
‘You’re one, my uncle Charlus is one. What d’you expect? I’ve never
liked all that, it’s not my fault.’

Naturally, I enacted the rule I had imposed on Saint-Loup, not to come
and visit me except when summoned, equally strictly in the case of the
people, whoever they were, with whom I had gradually become friendly in
La Raspelière, Féterne, Montsurvent and elsewhere; and when from the
hotel I saw the smoke of the three o’clock train, whose plume long
remained stationary, clinging to the sides of the green slopes in the
anfractuosities of the Parville cliffs, I felt no hesitation concerning
the visitor who was coming to have tea with me but was as yet, in the
manner of a god, concealed beneath that little cloud. I am obliged to
confess that this visitor, previously authorized by me to come, was
almost never Saniette, and I have often reproached myself for this. But
Saniette’s consciousness of being a bore (even more so when paying a
visit, naturally, than when recounting a story) meant that although he
was better educated, more intelligent and better than many others, it
seemed impossible to experience in his company, not only any pleasure,
but anything except an almost intolerable lowness of spirits which
spoiled your afternoon. Probably, if Saniette had confessed openly to
the boredom he was afraid of causing, you would not have dreaded his
visits. Boredom is one of the less serious evils which we have to
endure, and his existed perhaps only in the imagination of others, or
had been inoculated in him thanks to a kind of suggestion through them,
which had found a purchase on his likeable modesty. But so anxious was
he not to let it be seen that he was not sought after, that he did not
dare offer himself. Admittedly, he was right not to behave as the people
do who are so glad to take off their hats to you in a public place that,
not having seen you in a long while but catching sight of you in a box
together with a brilliant set whom they do not know, they cast you a
furtive but resounding good evening, while apologizing for the pleasure,
for the emotion, they felt on seeing you, on discovering that you were
returning to old pleasures, that you were looking so well, and so forth.
Saniette, on the contrary, was far too lacking in boldness. He could, at
the Verdurins’ or in the little tram, have told me that he would have
great pleasure in coming to call on me in Balbec were he not afraid of
putting me out. Such a proposal would not have alarmed me. On the
contrary, he offered nothing, but with a tortured face and a gaze as
indestructible as a fired enamel, but into the composition of which
there entered, together with a breathless desire to see you – unless he
found someone more amusing – the determination not to let that desire
show, he said to me with a detached air: ‘You don’t know what you’re
doing these days? Because I’ll no doubt be coming near Balbec. But no,
it’s of no account, I was only asking you on the off chance.’ There was
no mistaking his expression, and the inverse signs with the help of
which we express our feelings by their opposite are so transparent that
you wonder how there can still be people who say, for example: ‘I’ve had
so many invitations I don’t know which way to turn,’ to hide the fact
that they have not been invited. Moreover, this offhand air, because
most likely of what had entered into its turbid composition, produced in
you what the fear of boredom or a frank admission of the desire to call
on you could never have produced, namely that sort of unease, or
repulsion, which, in the order of relations of simple social politeness,
is the equivalent of the disguised offer made to a lady during a love
affair by the lover whom she does not love, to see her the following
day, while protesting that he does not insist, or not even this offer,
but an attitude of false indifference. There at once emanated from
Saniette’s person some _je ne sais quoi_ which meant that you answered
him wearing the most affectionate of expressions: ‘No, unfortunately,
this week, I’ll explain…’ And I allowed there to come instead people who
were by no means his equal but who did not have his melancholy-filled
eyes, nor a mouth puckered by all the bitterness of all the visits that
he longed, while not saying a word, to pay to one person or another.
Unfortunately, only rarely did Saniette fail to meet on the ‘slowcoach’
the guest who had just been to see me, even supposing that the latter
had not said to me, at the Verdurins’: ‘Don’t forget I’ll be coming to
see you on Thursday,’ the selfsame day when I had told Saniette I would
not be free. So that he ended up by imagining life as being filled with
amusements arranged without him knowing, if not actually against him. On
the other hand, since we are never all of a piece, this too discreet man
was morbidly indiscreet. The one time when he chanced to call on me in
my despite, a letter, from I forget who, was lying on the table. After a
moment, I saw that he was listening with only half an ear to what I was
telling him. The letter, of whose provenance he was wholly ignorant, had
fascinated him and I thought that at any moment his enamelled eyes were
going to detach themselves from their sockets and join the letter,
without importance yet which his curiosity had magnetized. He was like a
bird that is about to hurl itself fatally at a snake. Finally, he could
no longer restrain himself, and first of all changed its position as if
he were tidying up my room. This being no longer enough for him, he
picked it up, turned it over, turned it back again, as if mechanically.
Another form of tactlessness was that, once riveted to you, he could not
leave. As I was unwell on the day in question, I asked him to catch the
next train and leave in half an hour. He did not doubt I was unwell, but
replied: ‘I’ll stay for an hour and a quarter and after that I’ll go.’
Since then, I have suffered for not having told him, whenever I could
have done, to come. Who knows? Perhaps I would have exorcized his
ill-fate, others might have invited him for whom he would at once have
given me up, so that my invitations would have had the twofold advantage
of restoring his happiness and ridding myself of him.

On the days that followed those on which I entertained, I was naturally
not expecting any visits and the car returned to fetch us, Albertine and
me. And when we got back, Aimé, on the top step of the hotel, could not
help watching, through impassioned, inquisitive and greedy eyes, to see
what tip I was giving the chauffeur. It was no use my closing my fist
around my coin or note, Aimé’s gaze would part my fingers. He would look
away a moment later for he was discreet, well brought-up and himself
content with relatively small perquisites. But the money someone else
received aroused an incompressible curiosity in him and made his mouth
water. For a few brief instants, he would wear the feverish, attentive
expression of a child reading a Jules Verne novel, or of a diner sitting
not far away from you in a restaurant who, seeing them carving for you a
pheasant to which he cannot or will not treat himself, abandons his
serious thoughts for an instant to fix on the poultry eyes made to smile
by love and envy.

Thus did these excursions by motor-car follow one another daily. But one
time, just as I was going back up in the lift, the liftboy said to me:
‘This gentleman came, he left me a message for you.’ The liftboy spoke
these words in a terribly croaky voice, and coughing and spitting in my
face. ‘I’ve got such a bad cold!’ he added, as if I were incapable of
noticing it for myself. ‘The doctor says it’s whooping-cough,’ and he
began again to cough and spit over me. ‘Don’t tire yourself by talking,’
I said with a kindly expression, which was put on. I was afraid of
catching whooping-cough, which, with my tendency to breathless attacks,
would have been very distressing. But, like a virtuoso refusing to cry
off sick, he prided himself on talking and spitting all the while. ‘No,
it doesn’t matter, he said (to you perhaps, I thought, but not to me).
Anyway, I’ll soon be going back to Paris (so much the better, provided
he does not give it to me first). It seems, he went on, that Paris is
very magnificent. It must be even more magnificent than here and than
Monte-Carlo, although _chasseurs_, guests even, and all the way up to
_maîtres d’hôtel_ who used to go to Monte-Carlo for the season, have
often told me that Paris was less magnificent than Monte-Carlo. They got
it wrong maybe, though to become a _maître d’hôtel_, you mustn’t be an
imbecile; you need brains in your head to take all the orders and
reserve the tables! I’ve been told it’s even more terrifying than
writing plays and books.’ We had almost reached my floor when the ‘lift’
made me go all the way down again because he had found the button was
not working properly, and in a trice he had fixed it. I told him I
preferred to go back up on foot, the hidden meaning of which was that I
preferred not to catch whooping-cough. But with a cordial and contagious
fit of coughing, the liftboy thrust me back into the lift. ‘There’s no
longer any risk, I’ve fixed the button.’ Seeing that he had not left off
talking and preferring to know the name of my visitor and the message he
had left to the parallels between the beauties of Balbec, Paris and
Monte-Carlo, I said to him (as to a tenor who is overtaxing you with
Benjamin Godard:¹⁴ Sing me some Debussy rather): ‘But who was it who
came to see me? – It was the gentleman you went out with yesterday. I’ll
go and fetch his card, it’s with the porter.’ Since the day before I had
dropped Saint-Loup off at the station in Doncières before going to fetch
Albertine, I thought the ‘lift’ meant Saint-Loup, but it was the
chauffeur. And by referring to him as ‘the gentleman you went out with’,
he had taught me at the same time that a workman is just as much a
gentleman as is a society man. A verbal lesson simply. Because, as for
the thing itself, I had never made any distinction between the classes.
And if, on hearing a chauffeur referred to as a gentleman, I had felt
the same astonishment as the Comte X, who had been that only for the
past week and whom, by saying ‘the Comtesse looks tired,’ I had caused
to look behind him to see whom I was talking about, this was simply
because I was unused to the vocabulary; I had never discriminated
between workmen, bourgeois and great noblemen, but would have accepted
all of them as friends without distinction, with a certain preference
for workmen, and after them the noblemen, not from taste, but knowing
that you can demand greater courtesy from them towards workmen than you
can obtain from the bourgeoisie, either because great noblemen do not
despise workmen, as the bourgeoisie does, or else because they are ready
to be courteous to anyone at all, like pretty women, happy to bestow a
smile they know will be received with so much delight. I cannot say on
the other hand that this way that I had of putting the common people on
an equal footing with members of society, although the latter were very
happy to accept it, always gave my mother entire satisfaction. Not that,
humanly speaking, she made any distinction at all between people, and if
ever Françoise was upset or unwell, she was always comforted and tended
by Mama with the same affection and the same devotion as her best
friend. But my mother was too much my grandfather’s daughter not,
socially speaking, to be a respecter of caste. For all that the people
of Combray showed themselves kind-hearted and sensitive, and had taken
on the noblest theories of human equality, my mother, when a _valet de
chambre_ got above himself, used _vous_ one time and slipped
imperceptibly into no longer addressing me in the third person, showed
the same displeasure at these usurpations as bursts out in Saint-Simon’s
_Memoirs_ each time a nobleman who has no right to it seizes on a
pretext to assume the title of ‘Highness’ in some legal instrument, or
not to show a proper deference to dukes, with which he gradually
dispenses. There was a ‘Combray spirit’, so refractory that it will take
centuries of kindness (my mother’s was boundless), and of egalitarian
theories, to succeed in dissolving it. I cannot say that, in my mother’s
case, certain particles of this spirit had not remained insoluble. She
would have found it as hard to offer her hand to a manservant as it was
easy to give him ten francs (which anyway afforded him far greater
pleasure). For her, whether she admitted it or not, masters were masters
and servants the people who ate in the kitchen. When she saw a chauffeur
eating with me in the dining-room, she was not altogether pleased and
used to say to me: ‘It seems to me you could do better where friends are
concerned than a mechanic,’ as she might have said, were it a question
of marrying: ‘You could find a better match.’ The chauffeur (luckily, I
had never thought of inviting this one) had come to tell me that the car
company that had sent him to Balbec for the season was recalling him to
Paris as from tomorrow. This excuse, all the more so because the
chauffeur was charming and expressed himself so simply that you would
always have said it was the Gospel truth, seemed to us to have to
conform to the truth. It only half did so. There was indeed nothing to
do any more in Balbec. And in any case, the company only half trusting
in the veracity of the young evangelist, bent over his wheel of
consecration, wished for him to return to Paris as soon as possible. And
indeed, if the young apostle had achieved a miraculous multiplication of
the kilometres when reckoning them up for M. de Charlus, in return, once
it was a question of accounting to his company, he divided what he had
earned by six. As a consequence of which, the company, believing, either
that no one was any longer taking excursions in Balbec, which the season
made seem plausible, or that it was being robbed, considered that on
either one of these hypotheses the best thing was to summon him back to
Paris, where, as it happens, there was also little activity. The desire
of the chauffeur was to avoid, if possible, the off season. I have said
– what I did not then know and knowledge of which would have spared me
much unhappiness – that he was very friendly (without their ever seeming
to be acquainted in front of other people) with Morel. As from the day
on which he was recalled, without our yet knowing he had a means of not
leaving, we had to make do for our excursions with hiring a carriage or
sometimes, in order to amuse Albertine and since she liked riding,
saddle-horses. The carriages were bad. ‘What an old rattletrap!’
Albertine would say. I would anyway often have liked to be in them on my
own. Without being willing to fix a date, I wanted this life to end
which I reproached with making me renounce, not so much work as
pleasure. However, it could also happen that the habits which were
holding me back were suddenly abolished, most often when some former
self, full of the desire to live with cheerfulness, replaced my present
self momentarily. I experienced this longing for escape most notably one
day when, having left Albertine at her aunt’s, I rode over on horseback
to call on the Verdurins and when I had taken an unmarked route through
the woods whose beauty they had extolled to me. Hugging the contours of
the cliffs, by turns it climbed and then, hemmed in between dense clumps
of trees, sank deep into wild gorges. For a moment, the bare rocks by
which I was surrounded, and the sea, which could be glimpsed through the
jagged gaps, floated before my eyes like fragments from some other
universe: I had recognized the landscape of mountains and sea that
Elstir has used as the setting for those two admirable water-colours,
‘Poet meeting with a Muse’ and ‘Young Man meeting with a Centaur’, which
I had seen at the Duchesse de Guermantes’s. The memory of them relocated
the place in which I found myself so far outside the present-day world
that I would not have been surprised if, like the young man of
ante-historic times painted by Elstir, I had in the course of my ride
come upon some mythological personage. All of a sudden my horse reared;
he had heard a strange noise, I had difficulty in controlling him and
not being thrown to the ground, then I raised my tear-filled eyes to the
spot from where the noise appeared to be coming, and I saw, fifty metres
or so above me, in the sunlight, between two great wings of glittering
steel that were bearing him away, a being whose indistinct face I
fancied resembled that of a man. I was moved as might a Greek have been
setting eyes for the first time on a demigod. I was weeping also, for I
had been ready to weep from the moment when I recognized that the noise
was coming from above my head – aeroplanes were still a rarity in those
days – and at the though that what I was about to see for the first time
was an aeroplane. Then, as when you sense some moving words to be
approaching in a newspaper, I waited only to have seen the aeroplane
before bursting into tears. The aviator meanwhile seemed to be
hesitating over his course; I felt there to lie open before him – before
me, had habit not made me its prisoner – every course through space, or
through life; he flew further on, glided for a moment or two above the
sea, then, abruptly making up his mind, seeming to yield to some inverse
attraction to that of gravity, as if returning to his native land, with
a slight movement of his golden wings, he headed straight up into the
sky.

To come back to the mechanic, he asked of Morel not just that the
Verdurins should replace their break by a car (which, given the
Verdurins’ generosity in respect of the faithful, was relatively easy),
but also, something much more awkward, their head coachman, the
sensitive young man given to gloomy thoughts, by him, the chauffeur.
This was effected within a few days in the following manner. Morel had
begun by getting them to steal from the coachman everything he needed to
harness up. One day he could not find the bit, another day the
curb-chain. On other occasions, it was his seat cushion that had
vanished, or even his whip, his blanket, the martingale, the sponge, the
chamois leather. But he always came to an arrangement with neighbours;
only he would arrive late, which made M. Verdurin annoyed with him, and
plunged him into a state of sadness and black thoughts. The chauffeur,
in a hurry to be taken on, declared to Morel that he was returning to
Paris. Some master-stroke was required. Morel persuaded M. Verdurin’s
menservants that the young coachman had declared that he was going to
lead them all into an ambush and had boasted of getting the better of
all six of them, and he told them that they could not allow that to
happen. For his own part, he could not get involved, but he was warning
them so that they might get their blow in first. It was agreed that
while M. and Mme Verdurin and their friends were out walking, they would
all set on the young man in the stables. I must record that, although it
was only the occasion for what was about to take place, but because the
persons concerned interested me later on, that on the day in question a
friend of the Verdurins was holidaying with them, whom they wanted to
take out on foot before his departure, fixed for that same evening.

What greatly surprised me when we left to go out was that, on that
particular day, Morel, who was coming with us on our walk, where he was
to play his violin under the trees, said to me: ‘Listen, I’ve got a bad
arm, I don’t want to tell Mme Verdurin, but ask her to bring one of her
footmen, Howsler for example; he can carry my instruments. – I think one
of the others’d be a better choice, I replied. They need him for
dinner.’ A look of anger passed across Morel’s face. ‘No, no, I’m not
entrusting my violin to just anybody.’ Afterwards, I understood the
reason for this preference. Howsler was the much loved brother of the
young coachman and, had he stayed at the house, could have gone to his
assistance. During the walk, low enough for the elder Howsler to be
unable to hear us: ‘He’s a good fellow, that one, said Morel. His
brother is, too, for that matter. If it wasn’t for that fatal habit of
drinking… – What, drinking? said Mme Verdurin, turning pale at the
thought of having a coachman who drank. – You wouldn’t notice it. I’m
forever telling myself it’s a miracle he hasn’t had an accident while he
was driving you. – But does he drive other people then? – You only need
to see how many times he’s tipped over, his face today is covered in
bruises. I don’t know how he hasn’t killed himself, he’s broken his
shafts. – I’ve not seen him today, said Mme Verdurin, trembling at the
thought of what might have happened to her, you distress me.’ She wanted
to cut the walk short so as to get home, Morel chose an air by Bach with
countless variations so as to make it last. As soon as we got back, she
went to the coachhouse, saw the brand-new shaft and Howsler all
bloodied. She was about to tell him, without remarking on it, that she
no longer had need of a coachman and to hand him some money, but he, of
his own accord, not wishing to accuse his workmates, to whose animosity
he had retrospectively attributed the daily theft of all the saddles and
the like, and finding that his forbearance led merely to his letting
himself be left for dead on the floor, asked to leave, which settled the
whole affair. The chauffeur came in the following day and afterwards,
Mme Verdurin (who had been obliged to take on a second one) was so
satisfied with him that she recommended him to me warmly as someone
totally trustworthy. I, all unknowing, employed him by the day in Paris;
but I am getting too far ahead of myself, all this will be met with
again in the story of Albertine. At this moment, we are at La
Raspelière, where I have come to dine for the first time with my loved
one, and M. de Charlus with Morel, the purported son of a ‘steward’ who
earned a salary of thirty thousand francs a year, had a carriage, and a
number of subordinate majordomos, gardeners, factors and farmers at his
beck and call. But since I have been running ahead so, I do not want all
the same to leave the reader under the impression that Morel might have
been wicked through and through. Rather, he was full of contradictions,
capable on certain days of genuine kindness.

I was naturally most surprised to learn that the coachman had been shown
the door, and even more so to recognize his replacement as the chauffeur
who had been taking Albertine and me out. But he reeled off some
complicated story, according to which he was supposed to have returned
to Paris, whence he had been sent for on behalf of the Verdurins, and I
did not doubt him for a moment. The sacking of the coachman was a reason
for Morel to talk briefly with me, so as to express his sadness at the
good fellow’s departure. For the rest, even aside from the times when I
was alone, when he would literally bound towards me in an effusion of
delight, Morel, finding that everyone welcomed me with open arms at La
Raspelière, and feeling that he had been wilfully excluding himself from
familiarity with someone who did not represent any danger to him, since
he had made me burn my bridges and removed any possibility of my
behaving patronizingly towards him (which I had as it happens never had
any thought of doing), ceased to keep his distance from me. I put his
change of attitude down to the influence of M. de Charlus, which had
indeed made him less limited and more artistic in some things, but in
others, where he applied the eloquent, mendacious and anyway ephemeral
formulae of the master to the letter, had made him even more stupid.
What M. de Charlus had been able to tell him was in fact the one thing
that I had assumed. How at the time could I have guessed what I was told
afterwards (and of which I have never felt certain, Andrée’s assertions
concerning anything connected with Albertine, later on especially,
having always struck me as needing to be taken with caution, for, as we
saw earlier, she was not genuinely fond of my loved one but was jealous
of her), what in any event, if it were true, had been remarkably well
hidden from me by the two of them: that Albertine knew Morel well? The
new attitude which, around the time of the coachman’s dismissal, Morel
adopted towards me, allowed me to alter my opinion of him. I retained
the low opinion of his character I had been led to form by the
obsequiousness that this young man had displayed towards me when he had
need of me, followed, immediately the service had been rendered, by a
contempt taken to the point of seeming not to see me. To which had to be
added the evidence of his venal relationship with M. de Charlus, as well
as of the instinct for incoherent bestiality whose non-gratification
(when that occurred), or the complications that it entailed, was the
source of his unhappiness; that character was not uniformly ugly,
however, but was full of contradictions. It resembled an old book of the
Middle Ages, full of errors, of absurd traditions, of obscenities, it
was extraordinarily composite. I had thought at first that his art, in
which he was truly a past master, had given him superior abilities that
went beyond the virtuosity of the performer. Once, when I was telling
him of my desire to get down to work: ‘Work, achieve renown, he said to
me – Who’s that from? I asked him. – From Fontanes, to Chateaubriand.’¹⁵
He also knew a collection of Napoleon’s love-letters.¹⁶ Good, I thought,
he’s literate. But this phrase that he had read who knows where was most
probably the only one he knew in the whole of literature, ancient or
modern, for he repeated it to me every evening. Another one, which he
repeated even more frequently, to stop me from telling anyone anything
about him, was the following, which he thought equally literary, but
which is scarcely French or at least presents no sort of sense, except
perhaps to a manservant obsessed with secrets: ‘Put no trust in the
mistrustful.’ In fact, by going from this stupid maxim to Fontanes’s
words to Chateaubriand, you would have scanned one whole part, varied
but less contradictory than it seems, of Morel’s character. This boy
who, provided there were money to be made by it, would have done no
matter what, and without remorse – perhaps not without a bizarre
contrariness, going as far as nervous overexcitement, but which was far
from meriting the name of remorse – who would, if he thought it was in
his own interest, have plunged whole families into grief or even into
mourning, this boy who put money ahead of everything else, ahead of, let
alone kindness, the most natural sentiments of a common humanity, this
same boy yet put ahead of money his diploma as first prize-winner at the
Conservatoire and that no disobliging remarks should be made about him
to his flute or counterpoint classes. Thus his greatest rages, his
gloomiest and least justifiable outbursts of bad temper stemmed from
what he called (no doubt generalizing from a few particular instances
when he had encountered men of ill-will) the universal duplicity. He
flattered himself he avoided this by never discussing anyone, by keeping
his cards hidden, by mistrusting everybody. (As misfortune would have
it, given what was to result from it after my return to Paris, his
mistrust had not ‘worked’ in respect of the Balbec chauffeur, in whom he
had no doubt recognized one of his own kind, that is to say, contrary to
his maxim, a man mistrustful in the proper meaning of the word, who
remains stubbornly silent when with decent people but at once sees eye
to eye with a debauchee.) It seemed to him – and he was not altogether
wrong – that this mistrust would always enable him to come off
unscathed, to slip uncaught through the most perilous adventures,
without their being able to hold, let alone prove, anything against him
in the establishment in the rue Bergère.¹⁷ He would work, would achieve
renown, would one day perhaps, his respectability intact, be chairman of
the violin jury at the prestigious Conservatoire.

But it is perhaps again to introduce too great a logic into Morel’s
head, to make his contradictions follow one from the other. In actual
fact, his nature was really like a sheet of paper in which so many folds
have been made in every direction that it is impossible to know where
you are. He seemed to have quite lofty principles, and in a magnificent
handwriting, marred by the crudest spelling mistakes, spent hours
writing to his brother that he had behaved badly towards his sisters,
that he was the oldest and their support; to his sisters, that they were
guilty of a breach of good manners vis-à-vis himself.

Soon now, with summer coming to an end, when you alighted from the train
at Douville, the sun, muffled by the mist, was no more than a block of
red in the uniformly mauve sky. To the great peace that descends in the
evening on these lush, saline meadows, which had induced many Parisians,
painters for the most part, to come and spend their holidays in
Douville, there was added a dampness which made them return in good time
inside their little chalets. In several of these, the lamp was already
lit. A few cows alone remained outside, gazing at the sea and lowing,
while others, more interested in humankind, turned their attention to
our carriages. One painter alone, who had set up his easel on a narrow
eminence, was working to try and render this great calm and the still
light. The cows perhaps would be serving him as unwitting and benevolent
models, for their contemplative air and their solitary presence once the
human beings had returned home, contributed in their way to the powerful
impression of repose that the evening gives off. And a few weeks later,
the transposition was no less agreeable when, with the autumn advancing,
the days became decidedly short and the journey had to be made in the
dark. If I had been taking a stroll during the afternoon, I needed to go
home and get dressed by five at the latest, by when the round, red sun
had already descended half-way down the slanting mirror I had once
detested, and, like Greek fire, had set light to the sea in the glass
fronts of all my bookcases. Some incantatory gesture having excited, as
I was putting on my dinner jacket, the alert and frivolous self that had
been mine when I used to go with Saint-Loup to dine in Rivebelle or on
the evening when I thought I would be taking Mlle de Stermaria to dine
on the island in the Bois, I was unconsciously humming the same tune as
then; and it was only on becoming aware of this that, by the song, I
recognized the intermittent singer, who indeed knew only that one song.
The first time that I had sung it, I was beginning to be in love with
Albertine, but I thought I would never get to know her. Later in Paris,
it was when I had ceased loving her and a few days after having
possessed her for the first time. Now, it was on loving her again and at
the moment of going to have dinner with her, to the great regret of the
manager, who thought I would end up living at La Raspelière and
abandoning his hotel, and who assured me he had heard that fevers were
rife there, due to the marshes of Le Bec and their ‘pregnant’ waters. I
was pleased by this multiplicity, which I could see thus deployed in my
life on three planes; besides, when we become for a moment a former
self, different that is from the one that we have been for a long time,
our sensibilities, no longer deadened by habit, receive from the least
shock impressions so vivid as to make all that has gone before seem
pallid, and on which, because of their intensity, we fasten with the
fleeting exaltation of a drunkard. It was already dark when we got into
the omnibus or the carriage which was to take us to the station to catch
the little train. And in the foyer the First President would say to us:
‘Ah, you’re going to La Raspelière! _Sapristi_, she’s got a nerve, Mme
Verdurin, making you spend an hour in the train in the dark, just to
have dinner. And then start the journey all over again at ten o’clock at
night in the very devil of a wind. It’s obvious you can’t have anything
to do,’ he added, rubbing his hands. He no doubt spoke thus out of
displeasure at not having been invited, and also because of the
satisfaction that ‘busy’ men feel – be their work perfectly fatuous – at
‘not having the time’ to do what you are doing.

It is legitimate, admittedly, for the man who drafts reports, lines up
figures, answers business letters, or follows prices on the Bourse, to
feel, when you say to him sneeringly, ‘It’s all right for you who have
nothing to do,’ an agreeable sense of his own superiority. But the
latter would assert itself equally contemptuously, if not more so (for
the busy man, too, dines out), were your recreation writing _Hamlet_ or
simply reading it. In which busy men are unthinking. For they ought to
reflect that the disinterested culture which strikes them as a comic
pastime for the idle when they come upon it at a moment when it is being
practised is the same as that culture which, in their own _métier_,
singles out men who are not perhaps better magistrates or administrators
than themselves, but before whose rapid promotion they bow their heads,
saying: ‘It appears he’s very well-read, altogether someone of
distinction.’ But above all the First President did not realize that
what pleased me about these dinners at La Raspelière was that, as he
rightly said, though in criticism, they ‘represented a real journey’, a
journey whose attraction seemed all the keener because it was not an end
in itself, that one was not looking for any enjoyment from it, this last
being assigned to the gathering for which one was bound and which never
failed to be greatly modified by the whole atmosphere surrounding it. It
was already dark now when I exchanged the warmth of the hotel – of the
hotel that had become my home – for the compartment into which we got
with Albertine, where the reflection of the lamplight on the window told
us, at certain of the wheezy little train’s stops, that we had arrived
in a station. So as not to risk Cottard’s failing to notice us, and not
having heard the station being shouted out, I would open the door, but
what came dashing into the carriage was not the faithful, but the wind,
the rain and the cold. In the darkness, I could make out the fields and
I could hear the sea, we were in open country. Before we joined the
little nucleus, Albertine would inspect herself in a little mirror taken
from a gold vanity case that she carried. The first times indeed, Mme
Verdurin having made her go upstairs to her dressing-room so that she
could tidy herself before dinner, I had, in the midst of the profound
calm in which I had been living for some time past, experienced a slight
stirring of disquiet and jealousy at being obliged to leave Albertine at
the foot of the stairs, and I had felt so anxious while I was alone in
the drawing-room in the midst of the little clan, and wondering what my
loved one was doing upstairs, that the following day I had, by telegram,
after asking M. de Charlus for advice as to what was most fashionable,
ordered from Cartier’s a vanity case that was the joy of Albertine and
of myself. For me it was a token of my peace of mind as well as of my
solicitude for my loved one. For she had certainly guessed that I did
not like her remaining without me at Mme Verdurin’s and had contrived to
make all her toilet preparations before the dinner in the compartment.

To the number of Mme Verdurin’s regulars, and the most faithful of all,
there had for several months now been added M. de Charlus. Regularly,
three times a week, the passengers parked in the waiting-rooms or on the
platform at Doncières-Ouest would see this fat man going past, with his
grey hair, his black moustaches, and red make-up on his lips that was
less noticeable at the end of the season than in the summer, when the
broad daylight had made it more garish and the heat half liquid. As he
made his way towards the little train, he could not help (merely out of
a connoisseur’s habit, since he now had an attachment that had made him
chaste, or at least, most of the time, faithful) casting, at the
labourers, the soldiers, the young men in tennis clothes, a furtive
glance, at once inquisitorial and timorous, after which he would at once
lower his eyelids over eyes that were almost closed, with the
unctuousness of an ecclesiastic busy telling his beads, and the reserve
of a bride plighted to her one love, or of a well-brought-up young girl.
The faithful were the more convinced that he had not seen them when he
entered a compartment other than theirs (as the Princesse Sherbatoff
also often did), like a man who has no idea whether people will be happy
or not to be seen with him and who gives you the option of coming to
look for him if you so desire. No such desire had been felt in the very
early days by the Doctor, who had wanted us to let him remain on his own
in his compartment. Making a virtue of his hesitant nature now that he
stood so high medically, it was with a smile, and leaning back, while
looking at Ski from over the top of his eyeglass, that he said, either
out of mischievousness or to learn his companions’ opinion by a
roundabout means: ‘You understand, if I was on my own, a bachelor… but
because of my wife, I ask myself whether I can allow him to travel with
us after what you’ve told me, whispered the Doctor. – What’s that you’re
saying? asked Mme Cottard. – Nothing, it’s none of your business, it’s
not for women,’ replied the Doctor with a wink, and with a majestic
self-satisfaction that came half-way between the poker-faced expression
that he maintained in front of his pupils and his patients and the
anxiety that had accompanied his shafts of wit in the old days at the
Verdurins’, and he went on talking in an undertone. Mme Cottard made out
only the words ‘of the brotherhood’ and ‘_tapette_’,¹⁸ and since in the
Doctor’s idiom the first denoted the Jewish race and the second those
who talked too much, Mme Cottard concluded that M. de Charlus must be a
garrulous Israelite. She could not understand why the Baron should be
ostracized on that account, and thought it her duty as the clan’s
doyenne to demand that he should not be left on his own, and we all made
our way towards M. de Charlus’s compartment, guided by a still perplexed
Cottard. From the corner where he was reading a volume of Balzac, M. de
Charlus remarked this hesitation; he had not, however, looked up. But
just as deaf mutes can recognize, by a current of air imperceptible to
others, that someone has come up behind them, he had, for alerting him
to the coldness felt in respect of him, a veritable hyperacuity of the
senses. This, as it customarily does in whatever domain, had given rise
in M. de Charlus to imaginary sufferings. Like the neuropaths who,
feeling a slight freshness, infer that a window must be open on the
floor above, fly into a rage and start sneezing, M. de Charlus, if
someone had displayed a preoccupied expression in his presence,
concluded that a comment he had made about that person had been repeated
to them. But there was no need even for anyone to be wearing a
distracted, or a grim, or a laughing expression, he would invent them.
In return, cordiality easily masked from him the backbiting of which he
was unaware. Having detected Cottard’s hesitation the first time,
although, much to the surprise of the faithful, who did not think they
had yet been noticed by this reader with the lowered eyes, he held out a
hand to them when they were a suitable distance away, he contented
himself with an inclination of his whole body, at once quickly
straightened, for Cottard, without taking the hand that the Doctor had
held out in his own suede-gloved hand. ‘We absolutely insisted on doing
the journey with you, Monsieur, and not leaving you on your own like
this in your little corner. It’s a great pleasure for us, Mme Cottard
said good-naturedly to the Baron. – I’m most honoured, recited the
Baron, bowing coldly. – I was very glad to learn that you had finally
chosen this region to set up your tabern…’ She was going to say
tabernacles, but the word struck her as Hebraic and disobliging for a
Jew who might see some allusion in it. So she caught herself up to
choose another of the expressions with which she was familiar, namely a
solemn expression: ‘to set up, I meant to say, “your penates” (it is
true that these divinities do not belong to the Christian religion
either, but to one that has been dead for so long it no longer has any
adepts to whom one might be afraid of giving offence). – We, alas, what
with the academic year starting, and the Doctor’s hospital duties, we
can never elect domicile for very long in one place.’ And pointing to a
cardboard box: ‘You can see what’s more how we women are less fortunate
than the strong sex; to go only as far as to our friends the Verdurins,
we’re obliged to take with us a whole range of impedimenta.’ During this
time, I was looking at the Baron’s volume of Balzac. This was not a
paper-covered copy, bought at random like the volume of Bergotte he had
lent me the first year. It was a book from his library, and as such
bearing the device ‘_Je suis au Baron de Charlus_’, or ‘I belong to the
Baron de Charlus’, for which was sometimes substituted, to display the
studious tastes of the Guermantes, ‘_In proeliis non semper_’ or still
another one, ‘_Non sine labore_.’¹⁹ But we shall soon see these being
replaced by others, in order to try and please Morel. After a moment,
Mme Cottard took up a subject she considered was more personal to the
Baron, ‘I don’t know if you’re of my opinion, Monsieur, she said after a
moment, but I’m very broad-minded and as I see it, provided you practise
them sincerely, all religions are good. I’m not like those people who
start frothing at the mouth at the sight of a… Protestant. – I was
taught that mine was the true one,’ replied M. de Charlus. ‘He’s a
fanatic, thought Mme Cottard; Swann, except towards the end, was more
tolerant, it’s true he was a convert.’ But quite to the contrary, the
Baron was not simply a Christian, as we know, but pious in the fashion
of the Middle Ages. For him, as for the sculptors of the thirteenth
century, the Christian Church was, in the living sense of the word,
peopled by a crowd of beings he believed to be perfectly real: prophets,
apostles, angels, sacred personages of every sort, surrounding the Word
made flesh, his mother and her espoused, the Eternal Father, all the
martyrs and doctors, the race of whom in high relief crowd the porch or
fill the nave of the cathedrals. From amongst them all, M. de Charlus
had chosen as his patron intercessors the archangels Michael, Gabriel
and Raphael, with whom he held frequent conversations so that they might
convey his prayers to the Eternal Father, before whose throne they
stand. Thus Mme Cottard’s error amused me greatly.
To get off the terrain of religion, let us say that the Doctor, having
come to Paris with the meagre baggage of a peasant mother’s advice, then
been absorbed by the almost purely physical studies to which those who
wish to carry their medical careers all the way through are obliged to
devote themselves for a great many years, had never become cultured; he
had acquired more authority, but not experience; he took the word
‘honoured’ literally, was at once gratified by it because he was vain
and pained because he was a good-natured fellow. ‘That poor de Charlus,
he said that evening to his wife, he upset me when he told me he was
honoured to be travelling with us. You sense, poor devil, that he has no
connections, that he’s demeaning himself.’

But soon, without having needed to be guided by the charitable Mme
Cottard, the faithful had succeeded in overcoming the awkwardness they
had all more or less felt at the start, on finding themselves next to M.
de Charlus. No doubt in his presence, they kept always before them the
memory of Ski’s revelations and the idea of the sexual strangeness
enclosed within their travelling companion. But this strangeness even
held a sort of attraction for them. For them, it lent the Baron’s
conversation, remarkable in any case but in parts that they were hardly
able to appreciate, a savour which, by comparison, made the conversation
of even the most interesting of the others, of Brichot himself, seem a
little colourless. They had been pleased to acknowledge right from the
start, moreover, that he was intelligent. ‘Genius may lie next to
madness,’ announced the Doctor, and if the Princesse, hungry for
instruction, insisted, he would say no more, this axiom being all that
he knew about genius, and seeming moreover less demonstrable than
anything having to do with typhoid or arthritis. And since he had become
arrogant and remained ill-bred: ‘No questions, Princesse, don’t
interrogate me, I’m at the seaside for a rest. In any case, you wouldn’t
understand me, you don’t know medicine.’ And the Princesse would
apologize and fall silent, finding that Cottard was a charming man and
gathering that celebrities are not always approachable. In this first
period, they had in the end therefore found M. de Charlus to be
intelligent in spite of his vice (or what is generally so termed). Now
it was, without their realizing it, because of that vice that they found
him more intelligent than the others. The simplest maxims which, at the
adroit provocation of the university man or the sculptor, M. de Charlus
pronounced concerning love, jealousy or beauty, because of the singular,
secret, refined and monstrous experience from which they had been drawn,
assumed for the faithful that charm of the foreign which a psychology
analogous to that offered to us from time immemorial by our own dramatic
literature wears in a Russian or a Japanese play, as performed by
artistes from those places. They still risked, when he was out of
earshot, an unkind joke: ‘Oh! the sculptor would whisper, catching sight
of a young railwayman with the long eyelashes of a nautch-girl whom M.
de Charlus had been unable to stop himself from eyeing, if the Baron’s
starting to make eyes at the ticket collector, it’ll take us for ever to
get there, the train’ll start going arsy-versy. Just look at the way
he’s looking at him, we’re not on a train any more but a bummel.’ In
fact, however, if M. de Charlus did not come, they felt disappointment
almost at travelling only among people who were like everyone else and
not to have next to them this bedizened, pot-bellied and impenetrable
personage, reminiscent of a box, of some suspect and exotic provenance,
which gives off a curious smell of fruit, the mere thought of sampling
which would turn the stomach. From this point of view, the faithful of
the masculine sex derived a keener satisfaction, during the short
section of the journey between Saint-Martin-du-Chêne, where M. de
Charlus got in, and Doncières, the station where we were joined by
Morel. For, so long as the violinist was not there (and provided the
ladies and Albertine, keeping to themselves so as not to hamper the
conversation, remained at a distance), M. de Charlus did not hold back,
so as not to appear to be avoiding certain topics, from talking about
‘what it is agreed should be termed vice’. Albertine could not embarrass
him, for she was always with the ladies, out of the graciousness of a
girl who does not want her presence to restrict the freedom of the
conversation. But I was easily able to bear not having her beside me,
always on condition that she remained in the same carriage. For I, who
no longer felt jealousy nor scarcely any love for her, and gave no
thought to what she might be doing on the days when I did not see her,
when, in return, I was there, a simple partition that might conceivably
have been concealing a betrayal was unbearable to me, and if she went
with the ladies into the next-door compartment, a moment later, no
longer able to remain in my seat, and at the risk of offending whoever
might be speaking, Brichot, Cottard or Charlus, to whom I was unable to
explain the reason for my flight, I would get up, leave them sitting
there, and, in order to see whether something abnormal might not be
going on, move next door. And all the way to Doncières, M. de Charlus,
not being afraid to shock, would talk, often very crudely, of habits
which he declared that for his own part he considered neither good nor
bad. He did so out of cleverness, to display his broad-mindedness,
persuaded as he was that his own habits had aroused hardly any
suspicions in the minds of the faithful. He believed indeed that there
existed in the world a few people who had, following an expression that
later became common with him, ‘got him straight’. But he imagined that
there were no more than three or four such persons and that none of them
were on the Normandy coast. This illusion may seem surprising on the
part of someone so discerning and so anxious. Even in the case of those
whom he thought more or less in the know, he flattered himself that it
was only in the abstract, and, according to whether he told them one
thing or another, aspired to place the person in question outside the
suppositions of an interlocutor who, from politeness, pretended to take
him at his word. Even suspecting what I might know or suppose about him,
he imagined that this opinion, which he thought was of longer standing
on my part than in reality it was, was quite general, and that it was
enough for him to deny one or other detail in order to be believed,
whereas, on the contrary, even if knowledge of the whole always precedes
that of the details, it makes the investigation of these infinitely
simpler and, having destroyed the capacity for invisibility, no longer
allows the dissembler to hide whatever he pleases. Certainly, when M. de
Charlus, asked out to dinner by one or other of the faithful or some
friend of the faithful, took the most complicated detours in order to
introduce, into the middle of the names of ten people whom he was
citing, the name of Morel, he hardly suspected that to the reasons he
gave, always different, for the pleasure or convenience he might find in
being invited with him on that particular evening, his hosts, while
appearing to believe him implicitly, had substituted a single reason,
always the same, which he thought was not known to them, namely that he
was in love with him. Similarly, Mme Verdurin, seeming always to appear
quite to have accepted the motives, part artistic, part humanitarian,
that M. de Charlus gave her for the interest he took in Morel, never
stopped thanking the Baron feelingly for the touching kindnesses, as she
put it, that he showed the violinist. But how astonished would M. de
Charlus have been if, on a day when he and Morel were late and had not
come by the train, he had heard the Patronne say: ‘We shan’t wait for
the young ladies any longer!’ The Baron would have been all the more
astounded in that, hardly ever stirring from La Raspelière, the figure
he cut there was that of chaplain, of an _abbé_ from the repertory,
sometimes (when Morel had a 48-hour leave) sleeping there two nights in
a row. Mme Verdurin would then give them two communicating rooms, and,
to set them at their ease, say: ‘If you feel like making music, don’t
hesitate, the walls are like those of a fortress, you’ve no one on your
floor, and my husband sleeps like the dead.’ On these days, M. de
Charlus would relieve the Princesse and go to meet the new arrivals at
the station, apologizing for Mme Verdurin’s not having come on account
of a state of health that he described so graphically that the guests
entered wearing suitably concerned expressions and let out a cry of
surprise on finding the Patronne up and about, in a demi-décolletage.

For M. de Charlus had become, momentarily, for Mme Verdurin the faithful
of faithfuls, a second Princesse Sherbatoff. She was much less sure of
his social standing than of the Princesse’s, imagining that if the
latter wished to see only the little nucleus, this was out of contempt
for others and a predilection for it. Since this selfsame pretence was
peculiar to the Verdurins, who treated as bores all those with whom they
could not associate, it is incredible that the Patronne should have
believed the Princesse to be a soul of steel, detesting what was
fashionable. But she stuck by her opinion and was convinced that in the
case of the _grande dame_, too, it was in all sincerity and out of a
liking for intellectuality that she did not associate with bores. The
number of these had in any case gone down where the Verdurins were
concerned. The life of a seaside resort removed from an introduction the
consequences for the future that might have been dreaded in Paris.
Brilliant men, having come to Balbec without their wives, which made
things easier, put out feelers towards La Raspelière, and went from
boring to delightful. This was the case with the Prince de Guermantes,
whom the absence of the Princesse would not, on the other hand, have
decided to go to the Verdurins’ ‘as a bachelor’, had the magnet of
Dreyfusism not been so powerful as to cause him to ascend the rise
leading to La Raspelière in a single go, on a day, alas, when the
Patronne was out. Mme Verdurin was not certain in any case that he and
M. de Charlus were from the same social world. The Baron had certainly
said that the Duc de Guermantes was his brother, but that perhaps was
the falsehood of an adventurer. However fashionable he had shown himself
to be, however affable, and however faithful to the Verdurins, the
Patronne yet hesitated almost to invite him with the Prince de
Guermantes. She consulted Ski and Brichot: ‘The Baron and the Prince de
Guermantes, do they go together? – Good heavens, Madame, where one of
them’s concerned, I think I can say… – One of them, what good’s that to
me? Mme Verdurin had gone on, in annoyance. I’m asking you whether they
go together? – Ah, Madame, that sort of thing’s very hard to find out.’
There was no malice in this on Mme Verdurin’s part. She was certain as
to the Baron’s habits, but in expressing herself as she did it was not
they that she had in mind, wanting only to know whether the Prince and
M. de Charlus could be invited together, whether they would hit it off.
There was no unkind intention in her use of these ready-made
expressions, which are favoured by the ‘little clans’ of the artistic.
To parade M. de Guermantes, she wanted to take him, on the afternoon
following the lunch-party, to a charity event when some sailors from the
coast would be enacting a ship setting sail. But not having the time to
take care of everything, she delegated her functions to the faithful of
faithfuls, to the Baron. ‘You understand, they’re not to stay standing
about, like mussels, they’ve got to be coming and going, be seen
clearing the decks for action, or whatever you call all that. But you
who often go to the harbour in Balbec-Plage, you could certainly make
them rehearse without tiring yourself. You must have a better idea than
I do, M. de Charlus, of how to get young sailors going. But then we’re
giving ourselves a lot of trouble over M. de Guermantes. Perhaps he’s
one of those imbeciles from the Jockey Club. Oh, good heavens, I’m
saying bad things about the Jockey Club, and I seem to remember you’re
one of them. What, Baron, you’re not answering, are you one of them?
Will you not come out with us? Look, here’s a book I’ve received, I
think it’ll interest you. It’s a Roujon. It’s got a pretty title: _Parmi
les hommes_.’²⁰

For my own part, I was all the happier that M. de Charlus should quite
often have stood in for Princesse Sherbatoff in that I was in ill odour
with the latter, for a reason at once trivial and profound. One day when
I was in the little train, showering attentions, as ever, on the
Princesse Sherbatoff, I saw Mme de Villeparisis get in. She had in fact
come to spend a few weeks with the Princess of Luxembourg, but, shackled
to this daily need to see Albertine, I had never replied to the
proliferating invitations from the Marquise and her royal hostess. I
felt remorse at the sight of my grandmother’s friend and purely as a
duty (without leaving the Princesse Sherbatoff), I talked with her for
quite some time. I had absolutely no idea, however, that Mme de
Villeparisis knew very well who my companion was but had no wish to meet
her. At the next station, Mme de Villeparisis left the compartment, and
I even reproached myself for not having helped her alight; I went to
resume my seat next to the Princesse. But it was as though – a cataclysm
common among people whose position is insecure and who fear that you may
have heard ill reports of them, and despise them – a change of scenery
had been effected. Ensconced in her _Revue des Deux Mondes_, Mme
Sherbatoff did little more than move her lips in answer to my questions
and finally told me that I was giving her a migraine. I had no inkling
of what my crime was. When I said goodbye to the Princesse, the usual
smile did not light up her face, a curt nod depressed her chin, she did
not even offer me her hand and she has never spoken to me since. But she
must have spoken – but what to say, I do not know – to the Verdurins,
for the moment I asked them whether I would not do well to make some
polite gesture to the Princesse Sherbatoff, they came hastily out in
chorus: ‘No, no, no! That least of all. She doesn’t like courtesies!’
This was not done so as to cause a rift between us, but she had managed
to make them believe that she was indifferent to attentions, a soul
impervious to the vanities of this world. One needs to have met the
politician who passes for being the most plain-spoken, the most
intransigent, the most unapproachable once he has come to power; one
needs to have seen him in his days out of favour, timidly soliciting,
with the dazzling smile of a lover, the haughty salute of some
journalist or other; one needs to have seen the straightened spine of
Cottard (whom his new patients mistook for a ramrod), and to know from
what unrequited passions, what snobbish rebuffs, the seeming
haughtiness, the universally acknowledged anti-snobbery of the Princesse
Sherbatoff had been formed, to understand that the rule amongst
humankind – which allows of exceptions, naturally – is that the hard are
the weak whom no one has wanted, and that the strong alone, caring
little whether they are wanted or no, have that gentleness that the
crowd mistakes for weakness.

For the rest, I must not judge the Princesse Sherbatoff harshly. Hers is
so very common a case! One day, at the funeral of a Guermantes, a
distinguished man standing beside me pointed out a slim gentleman graced
by a pretty face. ‘Of all the Guermantes, my neighbour said, that’s the
most extraordinary, the oddest. It’s the Duc’s brother.’ I answered
unwisely that he was mistaken, that the gentleman was no relation at all
to the Guermantes but was called Fournier-Sarlovèze.²¹ The distinguished
man turned his back on me and has never acknowledged me since.

A great musician, a member of the Institute, a high official dignitary
who knew Ski, stopped off in Arembouville, where he had a niece, and
came to one of the Verdurins’ Wednesdays. M. de Charlus was especially
affable towards him (at Morel’s request), above all so that, on his
return to Paris, the Academician might enable him to attend various
private performances, rehearsals and the like, where the violinist would
be playing. The Academician, flattered and a charming man in any case,
promised, and kept his promise. The Baron was deeply touched by all the
kindnesses that this personage (who in fact, where he himself was
concerned, loved only, and with passion, women) showed him, by all the
facilities he procured for him so that he might meet Morel in those
official places into which the layman cannot go, by all the
opportunities offered the young virtuoso by the celebrated artist to put
himself forward, to become known, by nominating him, in preference to
others equally talented, for recitals that would be much talked about.
But M. de Charlus did not suspect that he owed the maestro all the more
gratitude in that the latter, doubly deserving, or if you prefer, twice
as culpable, was fully aware of the relationship between the violinist
and his noble patron. He encouraged them, while admittedly having no
sympathy with them, being unable to understand any love except that for
a woman, which had inspired all his own music, but out of moral
indifference, a professional wish to please and to be of service, a
worldly amiability and snobbery. As for his doubts concerning the nature
of that relationship, so few did he have that, at the very first dinner
at La Raspelière, he had asked Ski, referring to M. de Charlus and
Morel, as he might have done to a man and his mistress: ‘Have they been
together long?’ But, too much the man of the world to allow any of this
to appear to those concerned, and prepared, had it given rise to
tittle-tattle among Morel’s fellow-students, to suppress it and to
reassure Morel by saying to him in a fatherly way: ‘They say that about
everyone these days’, he did not cease to shower the Baron with
kindnesses, which the latter thought charming, but natural, being
incapable of suspecting the celebrated maestro of so much vice or so
much virtue. For no one was so mean-spirited as to repeat to M. de
Charlus the witticisms spoken in his absence, or the _à peu près_ about
Morel. Yet this simple situation suffices to demonstrate that even that
universally decried thing, which would nowhere find anyone to defend it,
‘gossip’, has, whether we are ourselves its object so that it then
becomes particularly disagreeable, or whether it teaches us something we
did not know about a third person, its psychological value. It prevents
the mind from falling asleep over the factitious view that it takes of
what it believes things to be like, which is only their outward
appearance. It turns this inside out with the magical dexterity of an
idealist philosopher and quickly offers us an unsuspected corner of the
reverse side of the fabric. Could M. de Charlus have imagined these
words spoken by a certain fond female relative: ‘How can you expect Mémé
to be in love with me? You’re forgetting I’m a woman!’ Yet she had a
genuine, deep attachment to M. de Charlus. Why be surprised then, that,
in the case of the Verdurins, on whose affection and kindness he had no
right to rely, the remarks that they made when far away from him (and it
was not only remarks, as we shall see) should have been so unlike what
he imagined them to be, that is to say the simple echo of those that he
heard when he was there? These last alone decorated with fond
inscriptions the little ideal pavilion into which M. de Charlus
sometimes went in order to dream on his own, when he would introduce his
imagination for a moment into the idea that the Verdurins had of him.
The atmosphere there was so sympathetic, so cordial, the respite so
comforting, that when M. de Charlus, before going to sleep, had come
there for a moment to relax from his cares, he never re-emerged without
a smile. But, for each of us, a pavilion of this kind is double: facing
what we think is the only one, there is the other, customarily invisible
to us, the real one, symmetrical with the one that we know, yet very
different, whose decoration, where we would recognize nothing of what we
were expecting to see, would alarm us as being formed of the odious
symbols of an unsuspected hostility. How aghast M. de Charlus would have
been, had he found his way into one of these adverse pavilions, by
virtue of some piece of gossip, as if by one of those servants’
staircases where obscene graffiti have been chalked on the doors of the
apartments by disgruntled tradesmen or dismissed domestics! But, just as
we are devoid of that sense of direction with which certain birds are
endowed, so we lack the sense of visibility as we lack that of
distances, imagining as close the concerned attention of people who, on
the contrary, never give us a thought, and not suspecting that during
this same time we are the sole preoccupation of others. Thus M. de
Charlus lived deluded, like the fish which believes that the water in
which he is swimming extends beyond the glass of his tank, which offers
him his reflection, whereas he does not see, beside him, in the shadows,
the amused passer-by who is following his antics, or the all-powerful
pisciculturalist who, at the unforeseen and fatal moment, deferred at
this moment in the case of the Baron (for whom the pisciculturalist, in
Paris, will be Mme Verdurin), will pull him ruthlessly out from the
medium in which he had liked living, to toss him into another one. Whole
nations, what is more, insofar as they are simply collections of
individuals, can provide examples, vaster yet identical in each of their
parts, of this profound, obstinate and disconcerting blindness. Up until
now, though it may have been a reason why M. de Charlus passed remarks
in the little clan of a pointless cleverness or a daring that gave rise
to surreptitious smiles, it had not yet had for him, nor was it to have
in Balbec, any serious disadvantages. A little albumen, or sugar or
cardiac arrhythmia does not stop life from continuing normally for
someone who does not even notice them, while the doctor alone sees them
as prophetic of catastrophes. At present, M. de Charlus’s liking –
whether Platonic or not – for Morel merely led the Baron readily to say
in Morel’s absence that he found him very good-looking, thinking this
would be taken quite innocently, and thereby behaving like a shrewd man
who, summoned to testify in court, will not be afraid to enter into
details that seem on the face of it to be to his disadvantage, but
which, on this very count, have more that is natural and less that is
vulgar about them than the conventional protestations of a stage
defendant. With the same freedom, always between Doncières-Ouest and
Saint-Martin-du-Chêne – or conversely, on the return journey – M. de
Charlus gladly talked about people who have, it seems, very strange
habits, and would even add: ‘I say strange after all, I don’t know why,
for there’s nothing so very strange about it,’ in order to prove to
himself how thoroughly at ease he felt with his audience. And he was so
in fact, provided that the initiative in these proceedings lay with him
and he knew that the gallery was mute and smiling, disarmed by credulity
or by a good upbringing.

When M. de Charlus was not speaking of his admiration for Morel’s
beauty, as if it had no connection with a proclivity known as a vice, he
would treat of this vice, but as if it were by no means his own. At
times, indeed, he did not hesitate to call it by its name. When, after
looking at the fine binding on his Balzac, I asked what he liked best in
the _Comédie humaine_, he answered, steering his thoughts towards an
_idée fixe_: ‘All one thing or all the other, the little miniatures like
_Le Curé de Tours_ or _La Femme abandonnée_, or the great frescos like
the series of the _Illusions perdues_. What, you don’t know _Les
Illusions perdues_? It’s so fine, the moment when Carlos Herrera asks
the name of the château his barouche is passing: it’s Rastignac, the
home of the young man he had once been in love with. Whereupon the
_abbé_ falls into a reverie that Swann used to call, which was very
witty, the “Tristesse d’Olympio” of pederasty.²² And the death of
Lucien! I no longer recall what man of taste²³ it was whose reply, to
whoever asked him what event had most distressed him in his life, was:
“The death of Lucien de Rubempré in _Splendeurs et misères_”.’ – I know
everyone’s wearing Balzac this year, just as last year it was pessimism,
Brichot broke in. But at the risk of grieving those souls yearning for a
Balzacian deference, and without aspiring, damn it all, to the role of
literary gendarme and to institute charges of faults of grammar, I will
admit that the copious improviser whose alarming lucubrations you appear
strangely to overrate, has always seemed to me an insufficiently
meticulous wielder of the pen. I have read those _Illusions perdues_ of
which you speak, Baron, torturing myself to attain to the fervour of an
initiate, and I confess in all simplicity of soul that these
_romans-feuilletons_ worded in pathos and in double or triple
gobbledegook (‘Esther happy’, ‘Where the wrong paths lead’, ‘The price
old men pay for love’) ²⁴ have always had the effect on me of
Rocambole²⁵ mysteries elevated by some inexplicable favour to the
precarious status of masterpiece… – You say that because you know
nothing of life,’ said the Baron, doubly irritated, for he sensed that
Brichot would understand neither his artistic nor his other reasons. ‘I
quite understand, replied Brichot, that, to talk like Master François
Rabelais, you mean I am _moult sorbonagre, sorbonicole et
sorboniforme_.²⁶ Yet, equally as much as my fellows, I like a book to
give an impression of life and sincerity, I am not one of those clerks…
– The _quart d’heure de Rabelais_,²⁷ broke in Doctor Cottard, with an
expression no longer of uncertainty but of witty self-assurance –… who
take a vow of literature following the rule of l’Abbaye-aux-Bois in the
obedience of M. le Vicomte de Chateaubriand, grand master of humbug,
according to the strict rule of the humanists. M. le Vicomte de
Chateaubriand… – _Chateaubriand aux pommes_?²⁸ broke in Doctor Cottard.
– He is the patron saint of the brotherhood,’ Brichot continued, without
picking up on the Doctor’s joke, who, in return, alarmed by the
university man’s words, looked anxiously at M. de Charlus. Brichot had
seemed lacking in tact to Cottard, whose pun had brought a delicate
smile to the lips of the Princesse Sherbatoff. ‘With the Professor, the
mordant irony of the complete sceptic never loses its rights,’ she said,
out of friendliness and to show that the doctor’s ‘witticism’ had not
gone unnoticed by her. ‘The wise man is of necessity a sceptic, replied
the Doctor. What do I know? “_Gnothi seauton_”, said Socrates. That’s
very true, excess in anything is a fault. But I’m flabbergasted when I
reflect that that was enough for the name of Socrates to have endured up
until our own day. What is there in that philosophy? Little enough, when
all’s said and done. When you reflect that Charcot and others have done
work a thousand times more remarkable and which at least rests on
something, on the suppression of the pupillary reflex as a syndrome of
general paralysis, and that they’re almost forgotten! When all’s said
and done, Socrates isn’t so extraordinary. They’re people who had
nothing to do, who spent their whole day walking about chopping logic.
It’s like Jesus Christ: “Love one another,” how very pretty. – My
friend…, pleaded Mme Cottard. – Naturally, my wife is protesting, women
are all neurotics. – But, _mon petit docteur_, I’m not a neurotic,
murmured Mme Cottard. – What, she’s not a neurotic? When her son’s ill,
she presents phenomena of insomnia. Still, I acknowledge that Socrates
and the others, they’re necessary for a superior culture, to get a gift
for exposition. I always quote the _gnothi seauton_ to my pupils at the
first lecture. Old Bouchard, who found that out, congratulated me. – I’m
not one of the supporters of form for form’s sake, any more than in
poetry I’d hoard millionaire rhymes,²⁹ resumed Brichot. All the same,
the _Comédie humaine_ – not so very human – is too much the opposite of
those works in which the art outweighs the subject-matter, as that
faithful old steed Ovid has it.³⁰ And it’s permissible to prefer a path
half-way up the slope, which leads to the vicarage of Meudon or the
Hermitage of Ferney, equidistant from the Vallée-aux-Loups, where René
majestically fulfilled the functions of an unyielding pontificate, and
from Les Jardies, where Honoré de Balzac, harassed by the bailiff’s men,
never stopped cacographying, for the sake of a Polish woman, as a
zealous apostle of double Dutch.³¹ – Chateaubriand is much more alive
than you say, and Balzac is a great writer nonetheless, replied M. de
Charlus, still too imbued with the tastes of Swann not to be irritated
by Brichot, and Balzac was familiar with those passions even that
everyone ignores or studies only in order to castigate them. Not to
refer again to the immortal _Illusions perdues, Sarrasine, La Fille aux
yeux d’or, Une Passion dans le désert_, even the somewhat enigmatic
_Fausse maîtresse_, will bear out what I’m saying. When I spoke of this
“outside Nature” side of Balzac with Swann, he used to say: “You’re of
the same opinion as Taine.”³² I didn’t have the honour of meeting Taine,
added M. de Charlus (with that irritating habit among society people of
the pointless “Monsieur”, as if they believed that, by qualifying a
great writer as Monsieur, they were bestowing an honour on him, or
perhaps keeping their distance, and letting it be seen that they did not
know him), I didn’t know Monsieur Taine, but I took it as a great honour
to be of the same opinion as him.’ Despite these ridiculous society
habits, M. de Charlus was in fact highly intelligent, and it is probable
that if some ancient marriage had established links between his family
and that of Balzac, he would have felt (no less than Balzac, for that
matter) a self-satisfaction of which he would not, however, have been
able to stop himself boasting, as though of a mark of admirable
condescension.

On occasions, at the station that came after Saint-Martin-du-Chêne, some
young men would get into the train. M. de Charlus could not help looking
at them, but since he cut short and disguised the attention he was
paying to them, it came to look as though it were concealing a secret,
more particular even than the real one; you would have said that he knew
them, and had let this show in spite of himself after accepting the
sacrifice, before turning back to us, as those children do who,
following a quarrel between parents, have been forbidden to greet
certain classmates, but who, when they meet them, cannot forbear to
raise their heads before falling back under the ferrule of their tutor.

At the word coming from the Greek with which M. de Charlus, in speaking
of Balzac, had followed the allusion to the ‘Tristesse d’Olympio’ in
_Splendeurs et misères_, Ski, Brichot and Cottard had looked at one
another with a smile that was less ironic perhaps than imbued with the
satisfaction that dinner guests might feel who had succeeded in getting
Dreyfus to talk about his own Affair, or the Empress about her reign.
They were counting indeed on pressing him a little further on the
subject, but already we were at Doncières, where Morel joined us. In
front of him, M. de Charlus kept careful watch on the conversation, and
when Ski wanted to bring him back on to the love of Carlos Herrera for
Lucien de Rubempré, the Baron assumed the annoyed, mysterious and
finally (seeing they were not listening to him) severe and judicial
expression of a father hearing improprieties being spoken in front of
his daughter. Ski having shown persistence in pursuing the matter, M. de
Charlus, his eyes bulging and raising his voice, said meaningfully,
indicating Albertine, who could not however hear us, being busy talking
to Mme Cottard and the Princesse Sherbatoff, and in the ambiguous tone
of someone wishing to teach a lesson to people of no breeding: ‘I think
it might be time to talk about things that might interest this young
lady.’ But I saw clearly that for him, the young lady was not Albertine
but Morel; he later confirmed the accuracy of my interpretation by the
expressions he used when asking that we should not have any more such
conversations in front of Morel. ‘You know, he said to me, referring to
the violinist, he’s not at all what you might think, he’s a very decent
boy who’s always stayed very sensible, very responsible.’ And you felt
from these words that M. de Charlus looked on sexual inversion as a
danger equally as threatening for young men as prostitution is for
women, and that if he used the epithet ‘responsible’ in connection with
Morel, it was in the sense that it acquires when applied to a young
working-girl. Then, to change the conversation, Brichot asked me whether
I was counting on staying much longer in Incarville. For all that I had
pointed out to him more than once that I was living not in Incarville
but in Balbec, he always fell back into his error, because it was under
the name of Incarville or of Balbec-Incarville that he designated this
part of the littoral. There are people who talk in this way about the
same things as ourselves but calling them by a slightly different name.
A certain lady of the Faubourg Saint-Germain always asked me, when she
wanted to talk about the Duchesse de Guermantes, whether I had seen
Zénaïde lately, or Oriane-Zénaïde, which meant that at the outset I did
not understand. There had probably been a time when, a relation of Mme
de Guermantes’s being called Oriane, she, for her part, had been called,
to avoid confusion, Oriane-Zénaïde. Perhaps, too, there had originally
been a station only in Incarville, and you went on from there to Balbec
by carriage. ‘What were you talking about, then?’ said Albertine,
surprised by the solemn, paterfamilias tone that M. de Charlus had just
usurped. ‘About Balzac, the Baron hastened to reply, and this evening
you’re wearing the exact outfit of the Princesse de Cadignan,³³ not the
first one, the one at the dinner, but the second.’ This coincidence
derived from the fact that, in choosing Albertine’s outfits, I drew my
inspiration from the taste she had acquired thanks to Elstir, who
greatly valued a sobriety that might have been called British had it not
gone with a greater comfort, a French softness. The dresses he preferred
most often offered to the eye a harmonious combination of grey shades,
like that of Diane de Cadignan. M. de Charlus was almost alone in
knowing how to appreciate Albertine’s outfits at their true worth; his
eye would at once pick out what constituted their rarity, their price;
he would never have named one fabric in mistake for another, and he
recognized the maker. Only he preferred – for women – rather more dash
and colour than Elstir could tolerate. And so, on that particular
evening, she threw me a glance, half smiling, half anxious, lowering her
little pink kitten’s nose. Indeed, overlapping with her grey
crêpe-de-chine skirt, her grey cheviot jacket made you suppose that
Albertine was all in grey. But signalling to me to help her, because her
bouffant sleeves needed smoothing down or pulling up for her to get into
or out of her jacket, she took the latter off, and since her sleeves
were of a very soft tartan, pink, pale blue, greeny, dove-coloured, it
was if a rainbow had formed in a grey sky. And she had been wondering
whether M. de Charlus was going to like it. ‘Ah! exclaimed the latter,
in ecstasies, look there, a sunbeam, a prism of colour. All my
compliments to you. – But Monsieur alone has earned any, replied
Albertine kindly, indicating me, for she liked to show what had come to
her from me. – It’s only the women who don’t know how to dress that are
afraid of colour, M. de Charlus went on. One can be brilliant without
vulgarity and soft without being drab. Anyway, you don’t have the same
reasons as Mme de Cadignan to want to appear detached from life, because
that was the idea she wanted to instil in d’Arthez with that grey
outfit.’ Albertine, interested by this wordless language of dresses,
questioned M. de Charlus about the Princesse de Cadignan. ‘Oh, it’s an
exquisite short novel, said the Baron dreamily. I know the little garden
where Diane de Cadignan walked with Mme d’Espard. It’s the garden of one
of my cousins. – All these things about his cousin’s garden, muttered
Brichot to Cottard, may, just like his genealogy, be something that the
excellent Baron values. But what interest can it have for us, who don’t
have the privilege of walking in it, don’t know the lady and have no
claim to a title?’ For Brichot did not suspect that one might be
interested in a dress or a garden as in a work of art, and that it was
as if in Balzac that M. de Charlus could again see Mme de Cadignan’s
little garden paths. The Baron continued: ‘But you know her, he said to
me, referring to the cousin in question and in order to flatter me by
addressing himself to me as if to someone who, exiled among the little
clan, was, for M. Charlus, if not of his world, then at least went into
his world. At all events, you must have met her at Mme de
Villeparisis’s. – The Marquise de Villeparisis that the château of
Baucreux belongs to? asked Brichot, looking captivated. – Yes, you know
her? M. de Charlus asked curtly. – Not at all, replied Brichot, but our
colleague Norpois spends part of his holidays every year at Baucreux.
I’ve had occasion to write to him there.’ I told Morel, thinking to
interest him, that M. de Norpois was a friend of my father’s. But not a
single movement of his face attested to his having heard, so poor an
opinion did he have of my parents, as having not come near to being what
my great-uncle had been, whose manservant his father was and who,
moreover, unlike the rest of the family, rather liked ‘cutting a dash’
and had left his servants dazzled by the memory of him. ‘It seems that
Mme de Villeparisis is a superior woman; but I’ve never been admitted to
judge of that for myself, any more than my colleagues for that matter.
For Norpois, who is as it happens the soul of courtesy and amiability at
the Institute, has never introduced any of us to the Marquise. The only
one I know who’s been received by her is our friend Thureau-Dangin, who
had an old family connection, and also Gaston Boissier,³⁴ whom she
wanted to meet following a study she found especially interesting. He
dined there once and came back under the spell. Mme Boissier hasn’t been
asked, though.’ At these names, Morel gave a feeling smile: ‘Ah,
Thureau-Dangin! he said to me, with an expression as interested as that
which he had displayed on hearing speak of the Marquis de Norpois and of
my father had remained indifferent. Thureau-Dangin and your uncle were
inseparable. When a lady wanted a centre seat for a reception at the
Academy, your uncle used to say: “I’ll write to Thureau-Dangin.” And of
course the seat was sent straight away, for you can well understand that
M. Thureau-Dangin wouldn’t have risked refusing your uncle anything,
who’d have got his own back on him. It amuses me, too, to hear the name
Boissier, for it was there your great-uncle did all his shopping for the
ladies at the New Year.³⁵ I know because I know the person who was
responsible for doing it.’ He had done more than know him, it was his
own father. Certain of these affectionate allusions by Morel to my
uncle’s memory touched on the fact that we were not counting on
remaining for ever in the Guermantes _hôtel_, where we had only come to
lodge on account of my grandmother. There was talk now and again of a
possible move. But in order to understand the advice that Charles Morel
was giving me in this regard, you need to know that in the old days my
great-uncle had lived at 40 _bis_ boulevard Malesherbes.³⁶ The
consequence of which was that, in the family, since we used to go
frequently to my uncle Adolphe’s up until the fateful day when I had
caused a rift between him and my parents by retailing the story of the
lady in pink, instead of saying ‘at your uncle’s’, we would say ‘at 40
_bis_’. Some of Mama’s cousins would say to her, in the most natural
way: ‘Ah, we can’t have you on Sunday, you’re dining at 40 _bis_.’ If I
was going to visit a relative, I was advised to go first of all to ‘40
_bis_’, so that my uncle should not be offended that we had not begun
with him. He was the owner of the house and proved, truth to tell, very
difficult when it came to choosing his tenants, who were all friends, or
became so. Colonel le Baron de Vatry came every day to smoke a cigar
with him in order to get his repairs done more easily. The _porte
cochère_ was always closed. If my uncle caught sight of any washing or a
carpet at a window, he would enter in a fury and have them taken back in
more quickly than a policeman would today. He nonetheless let part of
the house, keeping for himself only two floors and the stables. In spite
of which, knowing how to please him by praising the excellent state of
upkeep of the house, we extolled the comfort of the ‘little hôtel’, as
if my uncle had been its sole occupant, and he let it pass, without
offering any formal denial as he should have done. The ‘little _hôtel_’
was certainly comfortable (my uncle having introduced all the new
inventions of the day). But there was nothing extraordinary about it. My
uncle alone, while talking with false modesty about ‘my little hovel’,
was convinced, or had at all events instilled into his manservant, his
manservant’s wife, the coachman and the cook, the idea that nowhere in
Paris did there exist anything comparable, where comfort, luxury and
attraction were concerned, to the little _hôtel_. Charles Morel had
grown up in this belief. In it he had remained. And so, even on the days
when he was not talking to me, if on the train I mentioned to someone
the possibility of our moving, he would at once smile at me and wink
knowingly, saying: ‘Ah, what you need is something in the style of 40
_bis_! You’d be really comfortable there! It can be said your uncle knew
what he was doing. I’m quite sure there’s nothing that comes up to 40
_bis_ in the whole of Paris.’

From the melancholy expression which M. de Charlus had assumed when
talking about the Princesse de Cadignan, I had a clear sense that that
novel had not set him thinking only about the small garden of a cousin
who meant little to him. He fell into a profound reverie and, as if
talking to himself: ‘_Les Secrets de la Princesse de Cadignan_! he
exclaimed, what a masterpiece! So very profound, so very painful, and
Diane’s bad reputation, which she’s so afraid of the man she loves
finding out about! How eternally true, and more general than it may
appear! There’s so much to it!’ M. de Charlus uttered these words with a
sadness that you felt he found not without its charm, however.
Certainly, M. de Charlus, not knowing the precise extent to which his
habits were or were not known, had been fearful for some time past that,
once he had returned to Paris and he was seen with Morel, the latter’s
family might step in and his happiness be thus put in jeopardy. This
eventuality had probably appeared to him hitherto only as something
profoundly disagreeable and painful. But the Baron was very much the
artist. And now that he had, in these past few moments, merged his own
situation with that described by Balzac, he had in some sense taken
refuge in the novel and, in the misfortune that perhaps threatened him,
or which did not at all events fail to alarm him, he had the consolation
of discovering in his own anxiety what Swann, and Saint-Loup also, would
have called something ‘very Balzacian’. This identification with the
Princesse de Cadignan had been made easy for M. de Charlus by virtue of
the mental transposition which had become habitual with him and of which
he had already given various examples. This was enough, indeed, for the
mere replacement of the woman, as the beloved object, by a young man, at
once to set in train around the latter that whole process of social
complications which develops around a normal liaison. When, for whatever
reason, they introduce a change once and for all into the calendar, or
into time-tables, if the year is made to start a few weeks later or
midnight to strike a quarter of an hour earlier, since the days will
nevertheless contain twenty-four hours and the months thirty days,
everything that depends on the measurement of time will remain
identical. Everything can have been changed without leading to any
disturbance, since the ratio between the figures is still the same. So,
too, with the lives that adopt ‘Central European Time’ or the Eastern
calendar. It even seems that the pride we take in keeping an actress may
have played a part in this particular liaison. When, from the very first
day, M. de Charlus had made inquiries into Morel’s origins, he had
certainly learned that he was of humble extraction, but a
_demi-mondaine_ with whom we are in love is no less glamorous in our
eyes for being a daughter of poor people. On the other hand, the
well-known musicians to whom he had written – not even out of
self-interest, like the friends who, when introducing Swann to Odette,
had portrayed her as more difficult and more sought-after than she was –
but out of the simple triteness of men in the public eye overpraising a
beginner, had replied to the Baron: ‘Ah, a great talent, considerable
position, given how young he is, of course, much appreciated by the
cognoscenti, will make his way.’ And out of that obsession which people
who know nothing of inversion have, to talk about masculine beauty: ‘And
then he looks pretty when he’s playing; he does better than anyone at a
concert; he has pretty hair and distinguished attitudes, his expression
is ravishing, he’s the very picture of a violinist.’ And so M. de
Charlus, over-excited in any case by Morel, who did not fail to let him
know of how many propositions he was the object, was flattered to take
him back with him, and to create for him a garret to which he often
returned. For he wanted the rest of the time free, as was necessitated
by his career, with which M. de Charlus was anxious, however much money
he might have to give him, that Morel should continue, either in the
very Guermantes-like belief that a man has to do something, that we are
only as good as our talents, and that noble birth or money are merely
the zero that multiplies a value, or because he was afraid that, if he
were unoccupied and never out of his sight, the violinist might become
bored. He did not want in any case to deprive himself of the pleasure he
got, at certain major concerts, from telling himself: ‘The man they’re
applauding at this moment will be at home with me tonight.’ Fashionable
people, when they are in love and whatever the form of that love, stake
their vanity on what may destroy the advantages in which their vanity
would previously have found satisfaction.

Morel, sensing that I bore him no malice, genuinely attached to M. de
Charlus, and perfectly indifferent physically to both of us moreover,
ended by displaying in my own case the same feelings of warm sympathy as
a cocotte who knows that you do not desire her and that in you her lover
has a genuine friend who will not try to make trouble between them. Not
only did he talk to me exactly as Rachel, Saint-Loup’s mistress, had
once done, but even, judging by what M. de Charlus repeated to me, said
the same things about me in my absence as Rachel had said about me to
Robert. Indeed, M. de Charlus said to me: ‘He’s very fond of you,’ like
Robert: ‘She’s very fond of you.’ And like the nephew for the sake of
his mistress, it was for Morel’s sake that the uncle frequently invited
me to go and dine with them. There were moreover no fewer storms between
them than between Robert and Rachel. It is true that Charlie (Morel)
once out of the way, M. de Charlus never tired of singing his praises,
repeating, what he found flattering, that the violinist was so good to
him. It was noticeable nonetheless that frequently, even in front of all
the faithful, Charlie wore an irritated expression instead of appearing
always happy and submissive as the Baron would have wished. This
irritation even got later on to the point where, in consequence of the
weakness that led M. de Charlus to forgive Morel any unseemliness in his
attitude, the violinist did not try to conceal it, or even affected it.
I have seen M. de Charlus, on entering a railway compartment where
Charlie was sitting with some of his soldier friends, greeted by a shrug
of the shoulders from the musician, accompanied by a wink to his
comrades. Or else he would make out he was asleep, like someone overcome
by boredom at this new arrival. Or he would start to cough, the others
would laugh, jokingly adopt the mincing speech of men of M. de Charlus’s
kind, and draw Charlie into a corner, who finally returned, as though
having been forced, next to M. de Charlus, whose heart had been pierced
by all these arrows. It is inconceivable that he should have borne with
them; and these ever-changing forms of suffering posed once again for M.
de Charlus the problem of happiness, forced him not only to demand more,
but to long for something other, the previous arrangement finding itself
vitiated by an awful memory. Yet, however painful these scenes were
afterwards to become, it has to be acknowledged that, in the early
stages, the genius of the French man of the people traced for Morel,
caused him to be clothed in, charming forms of simplicity, of apparent
candour, of an independent pride even that seemed inspired by
disinterestedness. This was false, but the advantage of such an attitude
lay all the more with Morel inasmuch as, while the one who loves is
forever obliged to return to the charge, to raise the bidding, it is, on
the contrary, easy for the one who does not love to follow a straight
line, at once inflexible and graceful. It existed by virtue of a racial
privilege in the very open face of the same Morel whose heart was so
tightly closed, a face embellished by that neo-Hellenic grace which
flowers in the basilicas of Champagne. For all his simulated pride,
often, on catching sight of M. de Charlus at a moment when he was not
expecting it, he was embarrassed for the little clan’s sake, blushed and
looked down, to the great delight of the Baron, who read a whole novel
into it. It was a sign merely of irritation and of shame. There were
times when he gave vent to the first; for however calm and strenuously
proper Morel’s attitude might normally be, it did not go without being
frequently belied. At times even, at some remark made to him by the
Baron, there would burst from Morel, in a harsh voice, an insolent
riposte by which everyone was shocked. M. de Charlus would lower his
head, with a sad expression, without making any answer, and, with that
ability which idolatrous fathers have of believing that their children’s
coldness or harshness has gone unnoticed, continued just the same to
sing the violinist’s praises. M. de Charlus was not always so
submissive, but his rebellions generally failed to achieve their end,
mainly because, having lived among society people, in calculating the
reactions he might evoke, he made allowance for obsequiousness, if not
inborn then acquired through upbringing. But, with Morel, he came up
instead against some plebeian whim of momentary indifference. Alas for
M. de Charlus, he had not understood that, so far as Morel was
concerned, everything else took second place to matters where the
Conservatoire and the Conservatoire’s good reputation (though this,
which was to become more serious, was not as yet an issue) were at
stake. Thus does the bourgeoisie, for example, find it easy to change
their names out of vanity, great noblemen for advantage. For the young
violinist, on the contrary, the name of Morel was indissolubly linked to
his first prize for violin, hence any modification was out of the
question. M. de Charlus would have liked Morel to have everything from
him, including his name. Having remarked that Morel’s first name was
Charles, which resembled Charlus, and that the property where they used
to meet was called Les Charmes, he sought to persuade Morel that, a
pretty name agreeable to pronounce being one half of an artistic
reputation, the virtuoso should not hesitate to take the name of
‘Charmel’, a discreet allusion to the scene of their rendezvous. Morel
gave a shrug. As a clinching argument, M. de Charlus had the unfortunate
idea of adding that he had a manservant of that name. All this did was
to arouse the young man to a furious indignation. ‘There was a time when
my forebears were proud of the title of _valet de chambre_, of _maître
d’hôtel_ to the King – There was another time, answered Morel haughtily,
when my forebears cut the throats of yours.’ M. de Charlus would have
been greatly surprised had he been able to imagine that, failing
‘Charmel’, and resigned to adopting Morel and bestowing on him one of
the Guermantes family titles that he had at his disposal, but which
circumstances, as we shall see, did not permit him to offer the
violinist, the latter might refuse, thinking of the artistic reputation
attaching to his name of Morel and to the comments that would have been
made ‘in class’. So far above the Faubourg Saint-Germain did he set the
rue Bergère! M. de Charlus had of necessity to content himself for the
present with having symbolic rings made for Morel bearing the ancient
inscription, PLUS ULTRA CAROL’S.³⁷ Certainly, faced by an adversary of a
kind of which he had no experience, M. de Charlus ought to have changed
his tactics. But who is capable of that? Moreover, if M. de Charlus had
moments of awkwardness, so, equally, did Morel. Far more than the actual
circumstance which brought about the rupture, what was, at least
temporarily (but this temporary turned out to be final), to prove his
undoing with M. de Charlus, was that there was in him not just the
servility that made him grovel before any harshness and answer
gentleness with insolence. Along with this servile nature there went a
neurasthenia, made more complicated by his faulty upbringing, which,
being aroused in circumstances where he was in the wrong or was becoming
a responsibility, meant that, at the very moment when he would have
needed all his kindness, all his gentleness, all his cheerfulness, to
disarm the Baron, he became gloomy and quarrelsome, attempting to start
arguments where he knew people did not agree with him and maintaining
his own hostile point of view with a weakness of reasoning and a
peremptory violence which even enhanced that weakness. For, soon running
out of arguments, he would invent some nonetheless, in which he laid
bare the full extent of his ignorance and stupidity. These scarcely
showed through when he was being friendly and seeking only to please.
Conversely, you saw nothing else during his fits of moroseness when,
from having been inoffensive, they became hateful. M. de Charlus would
then feel overcome and invest all his hopes in a better tomorrow,
whereas Morel, forgetting that the Baron was keeping him in luxury,
would give an ironic smile of pitying condescension, and say: ‘I’ve
never accepted anything from anybody. That way, I’ve no one I have to
say a single thank you to.’

Meanwhile, and as if he were dealing with a man of the world, M. de
Charlus continued to exercise his rages, whether genuine or feigned, but
by now without effect. They were not always so, however. Thus one day
(which belongs in fact after this early period), when the Baron was
returning with Charlie and myself from a lunch at the Verdurins’, and
expecting to spend the late afternoon and evening with the violinist in
Doncières, the latter’s taking leave of him, the moment we left the
train, with: ‘No, I’ve got things to do,’ caused so keen a
disappointment in M. de Charlus that, although he may have tried to put
a brave face on it, I saw tears melting the make-up on his eyelashes, as
he remained bewildered in front of the train. Such was his grief that,
since she and I were planning on ending the day in Doncières, I
whispered to Albertine that I would certainly not like us to leave M. de
Charlus on his own because he seemed, I had no idea why, unhappy. The
dear child agreed with all her heart. I then asked M. de Charlus if he
would not like me to accompany him for a little way. He, too, agreed,
but refused to put my cousin to any trouble on that account. I derived a
certain comfort (and no doubt for the last time, since I was resolved to
break with her) from ordering her gently, as though she had been my
wife: ‘You go home in your direction, I’ll see you again this evening,’
and from hearing her, as a wife would have done, giving me permission to
do as I wished, and agreeing that, if M. de Charlus, of whom she was
very fond, had need of me, I should make myself available. We went, the
Baron and I, he swaying his fat body, his Jesuit’s eyes lowered, and I
following, as far as a café, where they brought us some beer. I sensed
that, in his anxiety, M. de Charlus had some plan in view. He suddenly
demanded paper and ink, and began writing with a strange rapidity. As he
covered sheet after sheet, his eyes were flashing with some furious
daydream. Once he had written eight pages he said: ‘Can I ask a great
favour of you? Forgive my sealing this note. But I must. You are to take
a cab, a motor-car if you can, to get there quicker. You’ll certainly
find Morel still in his room where he’s gone to change. Poor boy, he
tried to play the bully just as he was leaving us, but you may be sure
that his heart is heavier than my own. You are to give him this note
and, if he asks where you saw me, you will tell him that you stopped off
in Doncières (which is in any case the truth) in order to see Robert
(which is not, perhaps), but that you met me with someone you don’t
know, that I seemed to be in a furious temper, that you thought you
caught something about sending seconds (I am fighting tomorrow, indeed).
Above all, don’t tell him that I’m asking for him, don’t try to bring
him back, but if he wants to come with you, don’t stop him doing so. Off
you go, my boy, it’s for his own good, you may be averting a great
drama. While you’re gone, I shall write to my seconds. I have stopped
you going off with your cousin. I hope she won’t hold it against me, I
believe so even. For hers is a noble soul and I know she’s one of those
women who know how not to overlook the greatness of the occasion. You
must thank her on my behalf. I am personally indebted to her and it
pleases me that it should be so.’ I felt much pity for M. de Charlus; it
seemed to me that Charlie might have prevented this duel, of which he
was perhaps the cause, and I was revolted, were this the case, that he
should have gone off so unfeelingly instead of assisting his patron. My
indignation grew when, on arriving at the house where Morel was lodging,
I recognized the violinist’s voice, who, in the need he felt to
broadcast his high spirits, was singing lustily: ‘On Saturday evenings,
after the weekly grind!’³⁸ If only poor M. de Charlus could have heard
him, he who wanted you to believe, and himself believed no doubt, that
Morel at this moment was heavy at heart! Charlie started jigging with
delight when he saw me. ‘Hello, _mon vieux_ (forgive me calling you
that, one picks up vile habits from this ghastly life in the Army), what
a stroke of good luck, seeing you! I’ve got my evening to myself. Do
please let’s spend it together. We can stay here if you like that, we
can take a boat out if you’d rather, we can have some music, I don’t
have any preference.’ I told him that I was obliged to dine in Balbec,
he was most anxious for me to invite him, but I refused. ‘But if you’re
in such a hurry, why did you come? – I’ve brought you a note from M. de
Charlus.’ At that name, all his high spirits evaporated; his face
contracted. ‘What, he has to come pestering me even here! Then I’m a
slave! Do me a kindness, _mon vieux_. I’m not opening the letter. You
can tell him you couldn’t find me. – Wouldn’t you do better to open it?
I imagine it’s something serious. – No, a hundred times over, you don’t
know that old crook’s lies, his infernal stratagems. It’s a device to
get me to go and see him. Well, I’m not going, I want a peaceful
evening. – But isn’t there a duel tomorrow, I asked Morel, whom I had
supposed was in the know. – A duel? he said, looking stupefied. I’ve not
heard a word about that. And anyway, I don’t give a damn, that
disgusting old man can happily go and get himself massacred if he wants.
But hold on, you intrigue me, I’m going to take a look at his letter all
the same. You can tell him you left it on the off-chance in case I came
home.’ As Morel was talking, I was gazing in amazement at the splendid
books that M. de Charlus had given him and which were cluttering the
room. The violinist having refused those that bore ‘I belong to the
Baron’ and the like, a device that he found insulting to himself, as
signifying possession, the Baron, with that sentimental ingenuity in
which an unhappy love takes pleasure, had varied it by others,
originating with his forebears, but ordered from the binder’s according
to the circumstances of a melancholy affection. Sometimes these were
brief and confident, such as ‘_Spes mea_’ or ‘_Exspectata non
eludet_’;³⁹ sometimes merely resigned, such as ‘_J’attendrai_’;⁴⁰ some
were gallant: ‘_Mesmes plaisirs du mestre_’,⁴¹ or recommending chastity,
like that borrowed from the Simiane, semy of towers azure and
fleurs-de-lis, and twisted as to its meaning: ‘_Sustentant lilia
turres_’;⁴² others finally, despairing and fixing a rendez-vous in
Heaven with him who had wanted nothing to do with him on earth: ‘_Manet
ultima caelo_’;⁴³ and, finding the bunch of grapes he had been unable to
reach too green, and pretending not to have been seeking for what he had
not obtained, in one of them M. de Charlus had said: ‘_Non mortale quod
opto_’.⁴⁴ But I did not have time to look at them all.

If, in dashing this letter down on paper, M. de Charlus seemed to have
fallen prey to the demon of inspiration that was causing his pen to fly,
the moment Morel had broken the seal, ‘_Atavis et armis_’,⁴⁵ charged
with a leopard accompanied by two roses gules, he began to read with a
feverishness as great as that which M. de Charlus had shown when
writing, and his eyes travelled no less quickly across these hastily
scrawled pages than had the Baron’s pen. ‘Oh, my God, he exclaimed,
that’s all it needed. But where can I find him? God knows where he is
now.’ I hinted that, by hurrying, he would still find him perhaps at a
brasserie, where he had asked for beer in order to recompose himself. ‘I
don’t know whether I’ll be coming back,’ he said to his housekeeper, and
added _in petto_: ‘It’ll depend on how things turn out.’ A few minutes
later, we arrived at the café. I observed M. de Charlus’s expression at
the moment he caught sight of me. Finding that I had not returned alone,
I had the feeling that breath, that life itself, had been restored to
him. Being in a mood that evening not to be able to do without Morel, he
had invented that it had been reported to him that two of the regimental
officers had slandered him in connection with the violinist, and that he
was going to send his seconds to them. Morel had glimpsed the scandal,
his life in the regiment made impossible, and had come running. In which
he was not altogether wrong. For, to make his falsehood more plausible,
M. de Charlus had already written to two friends (one was Cottard) to
ask them to be his seconds. And had the violinist not come, it is
certain that, out of control as he was, M. de Charlus (to turn his
unhappiness into rage) would have sent them at random to some officer or
other, whom he would have found solace in fighting. In the meantime, M.
de Charlus, reminding himself that he was of purer stock than the House
of France, told himself that it was very good of him to be thus fretting
and fuming for the son of a _maître d’hôtel_, with whose master he would
not have deigned to associate. On the other hand, if he now took
pleasure in consorting with hardly anyone except debauchees, the
latter’s ingrained habit of not answering letters and of failing to keep
an assignation, without warning, and without apologizing afterwards,
produced so many emotions in him, since a love affair was often
involved, and the rest of the time caused him so much irritation,
inconvenience and rage, that there were times when he felt nostalgia for
the multiplicity of letters about nothing at all and the scrupulous
exactitude of ambassadors and princes, who, though, sadly, they might
have no attraction for him, yet afforded him a sort of respite.
Accustomed to Morel’s ways, and knowing how little hold he had over him
and how incapable he was of insinuating himself into a life in which
vulgar companionships, consecrated by habit, took up too much space and
time for an hour to be set aside for the evicted, proud and vainly
imploring nobleman, M. de Charlus was so convinced that the musician
would not come, was so afraid of having caused a permanent rift between
them by overstepping the mark, that it was all he could do to stifle a
cry when he saw him. But feeling himself victorious, he insisted on
dictating the peace terms and on himself extracting such advantages as
he could. ‘What have you come here for? he said. And you? he added,
looking at me, I specifically told you not to bring me him back. – He
didn’t want to bring me,’ said Morel, rolling towards M. de Charlus, in
his artless coquettishness, conventionally sad and languorously
old-fashioned glances, with an expression he no doubt thought
irresistible, of wanting to kiss the Baron and longing to burst into
tears. ‘It’s I who came in spite of him. I’ve come in the name of our
friendship, to implore you on both knees not to commit this folly.’ M.
de Charlus was delirious with joy. The reaction was almost too much for
his nerves; in spite of which he retained control of them. ‘The
friendship which you invoke somewhat inopportunely, he replied curtly,
ought on the contrary to make you approve of me when I do not think I
should allow the impertinences of a fool to go unchecked. In any case,
if I wanted to obey the entreaties of an affection that I have known
better inspired, it would no longer be in my power to do so, my letters
to my seconds have gone and I don’t doubt their accepting. You have
always behaved towards me like a young imbecile and, instead of priding
yourself, as you had a right to do, on the predilection I had shown you,
instead of letting that rabble of non-commissioned officers and domestic
servants amongst whom military law obliges you to live see what a source
of incomparable pride a friendship such as mine was for you, you sought
to apologize, to make a stupid virtue almost out of being insufficiently
grateful. I know that in this, he added, so as not to let it be seen how
deeply humiliated he had been by certain scenes, you are guilty only of
allowing yourself to be led on by the jealousy of others. But how, at
your age, can you be such a child (and a rather badly brought-up child)
as not to have guessed straight away that your election by me and all
the advantages that would result from it for you were going to stir up
jealousy, that all your comrades, while they were egging you on to
quarrel with me, would be working to take your place? I did not see fit
to warn you of the letters I have received in that connection from all
those whom you trust the most. I despise the overtures of these flunkeys
just as I do their ineffectual mockery. The one person who concerns me
is you, because I am very fond of you, but affection has its limits, as
you should have suspected.’ However harsh the word ‘flunkey’ might sound
in the ears of Morel, whose father had been one, indeed precisely
because his father had been one, the explanation of every social
misadventure by ‘jealousy’, a simplistic and absurd explanation, yet
hard-wearing and which, among a certain class, always ‘takes’, just as
unfailingly as do old tricks of the trade with audiences in the theatre,
or the threat of the clerical menace in political assemblies,⁴⁶ found
almost as ready an acceptance with him as with Françoise or Mme de
Guermantes’s servants, for whom it was the one source of humanity’s
misfortunes. He did not doubt that his comrades had been trying to nab
his place and was all the more unhappy about this calamitous, albeit
imaginary duel. ‘Oh, I despair! exclaimed Charlie. I shan’t survive it.
But aren’t they to see you before they go and find this officer? – I
don’t know, I think so, yes. I sent to tell one of them I’d be remaining
here this evening and I shall give him my instructions. – I hope between
now and him coming to make you hear reason; just allow me to remain here
with you,’ Morel asked him fondly. This was all that M. de Charlus had
wanted. He did not give in straight away. ‘You’d be wrong to apply here
the proverbial “Spare the rod and spoil the child”, for it’s you who are
the child and I intend to use the rod, even after our quarrel, on those
who tried despicably to do you harm. Up until now, to their prying
insinuations, daring to ask me how a man like myself could consort with
a gigolo of your sort, risen from nowhere, my one response was the motto
of my La Rochefoucauld cousins, “_C’est mon plaisir_”.⁴⁷ I have even
stressed to you more than once that this pleasure was susceptible of
becoming my greatest pleasure, without your arbitrary elevation
resulting in my own abasement.’ And in an almost insane impulse of
pride, he exclaimed, raising his arms: ‘_Tantus ab uno splendor!_’⁴⁸ To
condescend is not to descend, he added, more calmly, after this delirium
of pride and joy. I hope at least that my two adversaries, despite the
inequality of rank, are of a blood that I can cause to flow without
shame. I have made discreet enquiries in that regard which have
reassured me. If you retained any gratitude to me, you ought on the
contrary to be proud to see that, because of you, I am recovering the
bellicose temperament of my forebears, saying like them, in the event of
a fatal outcome, now that I have realized what a young rogue you are,
“_Mort m’est vie_”.’⁴⁹ And M. de Charlus spoke with sincerity, not only
out of love for Morel, but because a liking for combat that he
innocently believed he had got from his forefathers put him in such good
heart at the thought of fighting that he would now have felt regret at
giving up this duel, originally contrived only in order to get Morel to
come. He had never had an affair of honour without at once seeing
himself as valorous and identifying himself with the celebrated
Connétable de Guermantes, whereas for anyone else this same act of
taking the field would have seemed of the utmost insignificance. ‘I
think it’ll be very beautiful, he said to us, with sincerity, intoning
each word. To see Sarah Bernhardt in _L’Aiglon_, what is that?
Excrement. Mounet-Sully in _Oedipus_?⁵⁰ Excrement. It acquires at most a
certain pallor of transfiguration when it takes place in the Arena in
Nîmes. But what is it compared with that unprecedented thing, of seeing
the actual descendant of the Connétable do battle?’ At the mere thought
of which, M. de Charlus, unable to contain his delight, began to perform
_contre-de-quartes_ reminiscent of Molière,⁵¹ leading us to move our
beer-glasses closer for safety, and to fear that the first clash of
blades might wound the adversaries, the doctor and the seconds. ‘What a
tempting spectacle it would be for a painter! You who know M. Elstir, he
said to me, you should bring him along.’ I replied that he was not on
the coast. M. de Charlus hinted that he might be sent a telegram. ‘Oh, I
say that for his sake, he added, faced by my silence. It’s always
interesting for a master – in my opinion, he is one – to capture such an
example of ethnic revivescence. There’s perhaps only one a century.’

But if M. de Charlus was enchanted by the prospect of a fight that he
had at first thought purely fictitious, Morel was reflecting in terror
on the rumours which, thanks to the stir that the duel would make, might
be hawked all the way from the regimental band to the temple in the rue
Bergère. Already seeing his ‘class‘ knowing everything, he became more
and more insistent with M. de Charlus, who continued to gesticulate
before the heady prospect of fighting. He implored the Baron to allow
him not to leave him until the next day but one, the supposed day of the
duel, so as to keep him in sight and try to make him hear the voice of
reason. So affectionate a proposal overcame M. de Charlus’s last
hesitations. He said that he would try to find a way out, that he would
defer a final decision until the next day but one. In this way, by not
settling the matter all at once, M. de Charlus would be able to keep
Charlie for two days at least and use them to obtain from him
undertakings for the future in exchange for his giving up the duel, an
exercise which in itself, he said, enchanted him, and which he would not
forgo without regret. And in this, moreover, he was being sincere, for
he had always found pleasure in taking the field when it was a matter of
crossing steel or exchanging shots with an adversary. Cottard finally
arrived although having been much delayed, for, overjoyed to be acting
as a second but even more excited, he had been obliged to stop at every
café and farmhouse along the way, asking whether they would be kind
enough to direct him to ‘No. 100’ or the ‘the smallest room’. The moment
he was there, the Baron led him off into a room apart, for he thought it
more in keeping with the rules that Charlie and I should not be present
at their interview, and he excelled in the temporary appointment of some
nondescript room as a throne-room or debating chamber. Once alone with
Cottard, he thanked him warmly, but declared that it was likely that the
remark retailed had not in actual fact been made, and that in these
circumstances the Doctor might be so good as to warn the other second
that, barring possible complications, the incident was considered as
closed. The danger receding, Cottard was disappointed. He even wanted
momentarily to display anger, but remembered that one of his mentors,
who had enjoyed the most successful medical career of his day, having
failed to get into the Académie the first time by only two votes, had
put a brave face on things and gone to shake the hand of his successful
rival. And so the Doctor dispensed with an expression of pique that
would no longer have changed anything and, after muttering, he the most
fearful of men, that there are some things that one cannot let pass, he
added that it was better this way, that this solution delighted him. M.
de Charlus, anxious to evince his gratitude to the Doctor, in the same
way as M. le Duc his brother might have arranged the collar of my
father’s overcoat, or a duchess above all have put an arm round the
waist of some woman of the people, brought his chair up close to that of
the Doctor, in spite of the distaste with which the latter filled him.
And not only without any physical pleasure, but overcoming a physical
revulsion, as a Guermantes, not as an invert, in order to take leave of
the Doctor he held his hand and stroked it for a moment, with the
kindness of a master fondling the muzzle of his horse and giving it a
lump of sugar. Cottard, however, who had never allowed the Baron to see
that he had heard even the vaguest dark rumours circulating as to his
habits, but nevertheless saw him, in his heart of hearts, as forming
part of the class of the ‘abnormal’ (with his usual terminological
impropriety, and in the most serious tone, he even used to say of one of
M. Verdurin’s manservants: ‘Isn’t he the Baron’s mistress?’), persons of
whom he had scant experience, imagined that this stroking of his hand
was the immediate prelude to a rape, for the accomplishment of which,
the duel having served merely as a pretext, he had been drawn into an
ambush and led by the Baron into this lonely saloon, where he was about
to be taken by force. Not daring to leave his chair, to which fear kept
him rooted, he rolled his eyes in alarm, as though he had fallen into
the hands of a savage whom he was not altogether certain might not feed
off human flesh. Finally, M. de Charlus letting go his hand, and wishing
to be affable to the bitter end: ‘You’ll take a little something with
us, as they say, what in the old days was called a mazagran or a
gloria,⁵² drinks you now meet with, except as archaeological
curiosities, only in the plays of Labiche and the cafés of Doncières. A
“gloria” would be quite appropriate to the setting, would it not? And to
the occasion, what d’you say? – I am President of the Anti-Alcohol
League, replied Cottard. It would only need some provincial quack to
come past, for them to say I don’t practise what I preach. _Os homini
sublime dedit caelumque tueri_’,⁵³ he added, although there was no
connection, but because his stock of Latin quotations was somewhat
meagre, if adequate for impressing his students. M. de Charlus gave a
shrug and brought Cottard back to us, having demanded from him a
confidentiality that mattered all the more to him inasmuch as, the
motive for the abortive duel being purely imaginary, it had to be
prevented from reaching the ears of the officer thus arbitrarily
accused. As we were all four of us drinking, Mme Cottard, who had been
waiting for her husband outside, in front of the door, and whom M. de
Charlus had certainly seen, but had not troubled to bring in, entered
and bid the Baron good day, who held out his hand to her as if to a
chambermaid, without moving from his chair, partly as a king receiving
homage, partly as a snob who does not want a less than fashionable woman
to sit down at his table, partly as an egotist who takes pleasure in
being alone with his friends and does not wish to be intruded on. Mme
Cottard remained standing therefore, talking to M. de Charlus and her
husband. But perhaps because politeness, the ‘done thing’, is not the
exclusive privilege of the Guermantes, but may suddenly illuminate and
guide the most uncertain brains, or because, having frequently been
unfaithful to his wife, there were moments when Cottard, by a sort of
requital, felt the need to protect her against whoever was being
disrespectful to her, the Doctor suddenly gave a frown, something that I
had never seen him do, and without consulting M. de Charlus,
magisterially: ‘Come, Léontine, don’t stay standing up, sit down. – But
am I not disturbing you?’ Mme Cottard asked M. de Charlus timidly, who,
taken aback by the Doctor’s tone, had made no answer. And, not allowing
him a second opportunity, Cottard went on authoritatively: ‘I told you
to sit down.’

A moment or two later, we broke up and then M. de Charlus said to Morel:
‘I conclude from this whole business, which has ended better than you
deserved, that you do not know how to conduct yourself, and that at the
end of your military service I shall take you back myself to your
father, as did the Archangel Raphael, sent by God to the young
Tobias.’⁵⁴ And the Baron began to smile with an air of grandeur, and a
delight that Morel, who found scant pleasure in the prospect of being
thus taken home, did not seem to share. In the headiness of likening
himself to the Archangel, and Morel to the son of Tobit, M. de Charlus
had lost sight of the object of his remark, which had been to test the
ground to learn whether, as he wanted, Morel would consent to go with
him to Paris. Intoxicated by his love, or by his vanity, the Baron did
not see, or pretended not to see, the face that the violinist pulled,
for, having left the latter on his own in the café, he said to me with
an arrogant smile: ‘Did you notice, when I compared him to the son of
Tobit, how delirious with joy he was? That’s because, highly intelligent
as he is, he realized at once that the Father with whom he was going
henceforth to live, was not his father according to the flesh, who must
be some frightful moustachioed manservant, but his spiritual father,
that is to say Myself. How glorious for him! How proudly he drew back
his head! What joy he felt at having realized! I’m sure he’ll repeat
every day: “O God who didst give the blessed Archangel Raphael to be a
_guide_ to Thy servant Tobias on a long journey, grant to us, Thy
servants, that we may be always protected by him and armed with his
succour.” I had no need even, added the Baron, strongly persuaded that
he would one day sit before the Throne of God, to tell him that I was
the heavenly messenger, he realized that for himself and was speechless
with happiness!’ And M. de Charlus (who, on the contrary, had not been
deprived of the power of speech by happiness), unconcerned by the few
passers-by who looked round, thinking they had a lunatic on their hands,
exclaimed all alone and at the top of his voice, raising his hands,
‘Alleluia!’

This reconciliation put an end to M. de Charlus’s torments only for a
time; often Morel, having left on manoeuvres, too far away for M. de
Charlus to be able to go and visit him, or send me to talk to him, would
write the Baron fond and despairing letters, in which he assured him
that he would have to put an end to his life because some frightful
affair meant that he needed twenty-five thousand francs. He did not say
what the frightful affair was, and had he done so, it would no doubt
have been a fabrication. As for the money itself, M. de Charlus would
willingly have sent it had he not felt that this would have provided
Charlie with the means of dispensing with him and also of enjoying the
favours of someone else. Thus he refused, and his telegrams had the
curt, sharp-edged tone of his voice. Once he was certain of their
effect, he wished that Morel might have fallen out with him for good,
for, convinced that it was the opposite that would materialize, he was
made aware of all the disadvantages that would be reborn from this
inevitable liaison. But if no reply came from Morel, he could no longer
sleep, he no longer knew a moment’s peace of mind, so many in number
indeed are the things that we experience without knowing them, and the
profound inner realities that remain hidden from us. He then entertained
all manner of suppositions as to the enormity which had led to Morel
having need of twenty-five thousand francs, he made it take every form
and attached many proper names to it one after the other. I believe that
at such moments, M. de Charlus (and although by that time his snobbery
was on the decline, and had already been caught up, if not overtaken, by
the growing curiosity the Baron felt towards the common people) must
have recalled with a certain nostalgia the graceful, variegated whirl of
social gatherings at which the most charming men and women sought him
out only for the disinterested pleasure that he afforded them, and where
no one would have dreamed of ‘taking him for a ride’, or of inventing
some ‘frightful affair’ for which one is ready to put an end to one’s
days unless one is in immediate receipt of twenty-five thousand francs.
I believe that, and perhaps because he had all the same remained more a
man of Combray than had I, and had grafted a feudal pride on to German
arrogance, he must then have discovered that you do not become the fancy
man of a domestic servant with impunity, that the common people are not
quite the same thing as society, and ‘did not have confidence’ in the
people as I myself always have.

The little train’s next stop, Maineville, reminds me indeed of an
incident relating to Morel and M. de Charlus. Before speaking of it, I
ought to say that the stop in Maineville (when you were conducting a
fashionable new arrival to Balbec who, so as not to be in the way,
preferred not to stay at La Raspelière) was the occasion of scenes less
painful than the one that I shall recount in a moment. The new arrival,
having his hand baggage in the train, generally found the Grand-Hôtel
rather too far away, but since, before Balbec, there were only small
beach resorts with uncomfortable villas, he had, out of a taste for
luxury and well-being, resigned himself to the long journey when, just
as the train came to a stop in Maineville, he saw, suddenly looming up,
the Palace, which he could not have suspected was a house of
prostitution. ‘Don’t let’s go any further, he would invariably say to
Mme Cottard, a woman known for being of a practical bent and for her
sound advice. That’s exactly what I need. What’s the point of going all
the way to Balbec, where it certainly won’t be any better? Simply from
the look of it, I adjudge it’ll have every comfort; I could perfectly
well bring Mme Verdurin there, for, in return for her civility, I count
on giving a few small gatherings in her honour. She won’t have so far to
travel as if I stay in Balbec. This strikes me as exactly right for her,
and for your wife, my dear Professor. They must have private rooms,
we’ll bring the ladies here. Between ourselves, I don’t know why,
instead of leasing La Raspelière, Mme Verdurin didn’t come and live
here. It’s a lot healthier than old houses like La Raspelière, which is
bound to be damp, without being clean for that matter; they don’t have
hot water, one can’t wash as one would like to. Maineville strikes me as
far pleasanter. Mme Verdurin could have played her role of Patronne
there to perfection. Everyone to his own taste anyway, I shall establish
myself here, Madame Cottard, will you not alight with me? Wasting no
time, for it won’t be long before the train leaves again. You must pilot
me into the establishment, which will be yours and which you must have
often frequented. It’s a setting simply made for you.’ We had the utmost
difficulty in silencing the luckless newcomer and above all in
preventing him from alighting, for, with the obstinacy that often
emanates from a gaffe, he would insist, would pick up his suitcases and
refuse to hear another word until he had been assured that neither Mme
Verdurin nor Mme Cottard would come and visit him there. ‘At all events,
I shall elect domicile there. Mme Verdurin will only have to write to me
there.’

The recollection concerning Morel relates to an incident of a more
particular order. There were others, but I shall content myself here, as
the ‘meanderer’ comes to a halt and the porter shouts out Doncières,
Grattevast,⁵⁵ Maineville, etc., with noting what the small beach resort
or garrison evokes for me. I have already spoken of Maineville (_media
villa_) and of the importance it had acquired on account of the
sumptuous house of prostitution that had recently been constructed
there, not without exciting futile protests from the mothers. But before
saying how Maineville comes to be linked in my memory to Morel and M. de
Charlus, I must note the disproportion (which I shall have to go into
more thoroughly later) between the importance that Morel attached to
keeping certain hours free and the insignificance of the occupations to
which he claimed to devote them, this same disproportion being found
again amidst the explanations of another kind that he gave to M. de
Charlus. He, who played at being disinterested with the Baron (and could
do so without risk, given his patron’s generosity), when he wanted to
have the evening to himself, in order to give a lesson, and so on, did
not fail to add to his excuse these words, spoken with an avaricious
smile: ‘Besides, it may earn me forty francs. That’s not nothing. Allow
me to go there, because you can see it’s in my interest. I mean, I don’t
have a private income like you, I’ve a position to make, it’s time to be
earning a few sous.’ In wanting to give his lesson, Morel was not being
altogether insincere. For one thing, to say that money has no colour is
untrue. A new means of earning it can make coins grown dull with use
shine like new. Had he really gone out for the sake of a lesson, it is
possible that two louis handed him on leaving by a pupil would have
affected him differently from two louis fallen from the hand of M. de
Charlus. And then the wealthiest of men would journey miles for the sake
of two louis, which become leagues when you are the son of a manservant.
But M. de Charlus often had his doubts as to the reality of the violin
lesson, made all the stronger by the fact that the musician often
invoked pretexts of another kind, of an entirely disinterested order
materially speaking, and in any case absurd. Morel could thus not help
presenting a picture of his life, but intentionally, as well as
unintentionally, of such murkiness that certain bits of it alone let
themselves be clearly seen. For a whole month, he placed himself at M.
de Charlus’s disposal on condition that he had his evenings free, for he
wanted to keep up with a course of lectures on algebra. Come and see M.
de Charlus afterwards? Ah, that was impossible, the lectures sometimes
went on very late. ‘Past two in the morning even? asked the Baron. –
Sometimes. – But you can learn algebra just as easily from a book. –
Even more easily, because I don’t understand much at the lectures. –
Well then? Anyway, algebra’s not going to be of any use to you. – I love
it. It drives away my neurasthenia.’ ‘It can’t be algebra which makes
him ask for leave at nights, M. de Charlus said to himself. Can he be
attached to the police?’ At all events, Morel, whatever objections might
be raised, reserved certain late hours, whether on account of the
algebra or of the violin. On one occasion, it was neither one nor the
other, but the Prince de Guermantes who, having come to spend a few days
on the coast to pay a visit to the Duchess of Luxembourg, encountered
the musician, without knowing who he was and without being known to him,
and offered him fifty francs to spend the night together at the house of
prostitution in Maineville; a twofold pleasure, where Morel was
concerned, of the profit he would make out of M. de Guermantes and the
voluptuousness of being surrounded by women whose dark-skinned breasts
were displayed quite openly. Somehow or other, M. de Charlus had an idea
of what had transpired and where, but not of the seducer. Frantic with
jealousy, and to know who this latter was, he telegraphed to Jupien, who
arrived two days later, and when, at the beginning of the following
week, Morel announced that he would again be absent, the Baron asked
Jupien if he would undertake to bribe the madam of the establishment and
arrange that Jupien and he be hidden in order to witness the scene.
‘Understood. Leave it to me, my little charmer,’ Jupien replied to the
Baron. It is hard to credit the extent to which his anxiety had
disturbed, and by the same token had even momentarily enriched, M. de
Charlus’s mind. Love causes these veritable geological upheavals in our
thoughts. In those of M. de Charlus, which, a few days before, had
resembled a plain so smooth that, away into the distance, he would not
have been able to spot an idea lying on the surface, there had abruptly
arisen, hard as stone, a mountain massif, but of mountains so sculpted
it was as if some statuary, instead of carrying the marble away, had
carved it where it lay, and where there writhed, in giant, titanic
groups, Fury, Jealousy, Curiosity, Envy, Hatred, Suffering, Pride,
Terror and Love.

The evening on which Morel was to be absent had meanwhile arrived.
Jupien’s mission had been successful. He and the Baron were to go there
around eleven o’clock at night and they would be hidden. Three streets
before reaching this magnificent house of prostitution (to which they
came from all the fashionable places round about), M. de Charlus was
walking on tiptoe, disguising his voice and begging Jupien to lower his
voice, in case Morel should hear them from inside. But, the moment he
made his stealthy entrance into the hallway, M. de Charlus, who had
little experience of places of this sort, found himself, to his terror
and amazement, in a place noisier than the Bourse or the Hôtel des
Ventes.⁵⁶ It was in vain that he recommended the soubrettes who were
crowding round him to talk more quietly; their voices were being drowned
in any case by the noise of lots being cried and knocked down, made by
an old _sous-maîtresse_,⁵⁷ with a very dark wig and a face creased with
the gravity of a lawyer or a Spanish priest, and who, with a noise like
thunder, was forever coming out, as she allowed doors to be alternately
opened and closed again, like someone controlling the traffic, with:
‘Put Monsieur in No. 28, in the Spanish room.’ ‘No more to go in.’ ‘Open
the door again, these gentlemen are asking for Mlle Noémie. She’s
waiting for them in the Persian saloon.’ M. de Charlus was as terrified
as a provincial having to cross the boulevards; and, to choose a
comparison infinitely less sacrilegious than the subject portrayed on
the capitals in the porch of the old church in Couliville, the voices of
the young maids tirelessly repeated, in a lower register, the
_sous-maîtresse_’s orders, like the catechisms you can hear
schoolchildren chanting in the sonority of a country church. Alarmed
though he was, M. de Charlus, who, in the street, had been fearful of
being overheard, having persuaded himself that Morel was at the window,
was perhaps less frightened even so amidst the bellowing on these
immense staircases, where you realized that from the bedrooms nothing
could be seen. Finally, his calvary at an end, he found Mlle Noémie, who
was to hide him together with Jupien, but who began by shutting him in a
very sumptuous Persian saloon from where he could see nothing. She told
him that Morel had asked for a drink of orangeade and that as soon as he
had been served it, the two travellers would be taken into a viewing
room. Meanwhile, since she was being asked for, she promised them, like
in a folk-tale, that to help them pass the time, she would send them in
‘an intelligent little lady’. For she herself was being sent for. The
intelligent little lady wore a Persian wrap which she wanted to take
off. M. de Charlus asked her to do nothing of the sort, and she had
champagne brought up that cost forty francs a bottle. In point of fact,
during this time, Morel was with the Prince de Guermantes; he had, for
form’s sake, made a pretence of mistaking the room, and had gone into
one in which there were two women, who had made haste to leave the two
gentlemen to themselves. M. de Charlus knew nothing of all this, but was
cursing and trying to open doors, and he asked for Mlle Noémie again,
who, having overheard the intelligent little lady giving M. de Charlus
details concerning Morel that did not accord with those that she herself
had given Jupien, sent her packing and quickly sent in, as a replacement
for the intelligent little lady, ‘a nice little lady’, who did not show
them anything either, but told them what a responsible establishment it
was and likewise asked for champagne. The Baron, fuming, got Mlle Noémie
back once more, who told them: ‘Yes, it’s a bit long-winded, the ladies
are adopting poses, he doesn’t look as though he wants to do anything.
At last, faced by the Baron’s promises, and his threats, Mlle Noémie
went off looking annoyed, assuring them they would not have to wait more
than another five minutes. These five minutes lasted for an hour, after
which Noémie led a M. de Charlus mad with rage and a despondent Jupien
stealthily towards a door that was ajar, telling them: ‘You’ll have a
very good view. On the other hand, it’s not very interesting at present,
he’s with three ladies, he’s telling them about his life in the Army.’
Finally, the Baron was able to see through the gap in the door, as well
as in the mirrors. But a mortal terror forced him to lean against the
wall. It was indeed Morel that he had before him but, as though the
pagan mysteries and enchantments still existed, it was the shade of
Morel rather, Morel embalmed, not even Morel resuscitated like Lazarus,
an apparition of Morel, a spectral Morel, Morel revenant or conjured up
in this room (where the walls and divans everywhere repeated emblems of
sorcery), who was a few metres away from him, in profile. Morel was, as
after death, drained of colour; between the women, with whom it seemed
he should have been disporting himself joyously, livid, he remained
frozen in an artificial immobility; in order to drink the goblet of
champagne that stood in front of him, his lifeless arm tried slowly to
reach out and fell back. You got the impression of that equivocation
where a religion talks of immortality, but means by it something that
does not exclude nothingness. The women were plying him with questions:
‘You see, said Mlle Noémie in a low voice to the Baron, they’re talking
to him about his life in the Army, amusing, isn’t it? – and she laughed
– are you satisfied? He’s peaceful, isn’t he?’ she added, as she might
have said of a dying man. The women plied him with questions but Morel,
inanimate, did not have the strength to answer them. The miracle of even
one murmured word did not occur. M. de Charlus knew only a moment’s
hesitation before grasping the truth, that, whether it was Jupien’s
gaucheness when going to make the arrangements, or the potentiality of
secrets to expand once confided, which means that they are never kept,
or the indiscreet natures of the women, or fear of the police, Morel had
been warned that two gentlemen had paid a lot of money in order to watch
him, and they had brought out the Prince de Guermantes metamorphosed
into three women, and so positioned poor Morel, quaking and paralysed by
stupefaction, that, if M. de Charlus could see him only with difficulty,
he, terror-stricken, incapable of speech, not daring to pick up his
glass for fear of dropping it, had a clear view of the Baron.

Nor did the story end any more happily for the Prince de Guermantes.
When he had been made to leave so that M. de Charlus might not see him,
furious at this setback, but unsuspecting of who was behind it, he had
pleaded with Morel, though still unwilling to let him know who he was,
to fix a rendezvous for the following night in a small villa that he had
rented and which, despite the short time he would be staying there, he
had, in accordance with the same obsessive habit as we have earlier
remarked in Mme de Villeparisis, decorated with a number of family
mementos, so as to feel more at home. The next day, therefore, Morel,
looking behind him the whole time, fearful of being followed and spied
on by M. de Charlus, had finally, not having observed any suspicious
passers-by, entered the villa. A valet showed him into the drawing-room,
saying that he would go and inform Monsieur (his master had warned him
not to utter the word ‘Prince’ for fear of arousing suspicion). But once
Morel found himself alone and wanted to look in the mirror, to see
whether his lock of hair might have been disarranged, it was like a
hallucination. On the mantelpiece, the photographs, recognizable to the
violinist, he having seen them at M. de Charlus’s, of the Princesse de
Guermantes, the Duchess of Luxembourg and Mme de Villeparisis, petrified
him at first with fright. At the same moment, he caught sight of that of
M. de Charlus, which stood a little further back. The Baron seemed to
have immobilized Morel with a strange, fixed stare. Wild with terror,
Morel, recovering from his initial stupefaction, and not doubting that
this was an ambush into which M. de Charlus had led him as a test of his
fidelity, tumbled down the villa’s few steps four at a time, and began
running as fast as his legs could carry him along the road, so that when
the Prince de Guermantes (after believing that he had made this passing
acquaintance serve his period of probation, and not without wondering
whether it was altogether wise and whether the individual in question
might not be dangerous) entered the drawing-room, he found no one there
any longer. In vain did he explore with his valet and, for fear of
burglars, revolver in hand, the whole house, which was not large, every
corner of the little garden and the basement, the companion whose
presence he had thought certain had vanished. He came across him several
times in the course of the following week. But each time it was Morel,
the dangerous individual, who ran off, as if the Prince had been more
dangerous still. Immovable in his suspicions, Morel never dispelled
them, and even in Paris the sight of the Prince de Guermantes was enough
to cause him to turn tail. Whereby M. de Charlus was protected against
an infidelity that made him despair, and avenged, without ever having
imagined it, or above all in what way.

But already the memories of what had been retailed to me on this matter
are being replaced by others, for the _T.S.N_., resuming its snail-like
progress, is continuing to set down and pick up passengers at the next
stations.

At Grattevast, where his sister lived, with whom he had gone to spend
the afternoon, there sometimes got in M. Pierre de Verjus, Comte de
Crécy (who was known simply as the Comte de Crécy), a poor but extremely
distinguished member of the gentry whom I had met through the
Cambremers, with whom, however, he was by no means intimate. As he was
reduced to an exceedingly modest, almost impoverished, way of life, I
felt that a cigar and a ‘glass of something’ were things so agreeable to
him that I acquired the habit, on the days when I was unable to meet
Albertine, of inviting him to Balbec. Very discerning, expressing
himself beautifully, his hair quite white, with charming blue eyes, he
talked above all, in an artificial way, very tactfully, about the
comforts of the seigneurial life, which he had evidently known, as well
as about genealogies. When I asked him what was engraved on his ring, he
told me, smiling modestly: ‘It’s a sprig of verjuice.’ And he added with
the pleasure of a wine-taster: ‘Our arms are a branch of verjuice –
symbolic since my name is Verjus – stalked and foliated vert.’ But I
fancy he would have felt disappointment if, in Balbec, I had offered him
only verjuice to drink. He liked the most expensive wines, from
deprivation no doubt, and a profound knowledge of what he had been
deprived of, from taste, perhaps also from a propensity for
exaggeration. Thus, when I invited him to dinner in Balbec, he would
order the meal with a knowledgeable refinement, but ate rather too much,
and above all drank, making them serve the wines that need it at room
temperature, and chill those that demand to be put on ice. Before dinner
and after, he would indicate the date or the number he wanted for a port
or a _fine_, as he might have done for the generally unknown raising of
a marquisate, with which he was also familiar.

As I was for Aimé a favourite guest, he was overjoyed that I should be
giving these extra dinners and would shout to the waiters: ‘Quick, get
table 25 ready’; he did not say ‘get’ even but ‘get me’, as though it
had been for him. And since the language of _maîtres d’hôtel_ is not
altogether the same as that of _chefs de rang, demi-chefs_, commis and
so on, just as I was asking for the bill, he would say to the waiter who
had been serving us, with a repeated, soothing gesture with the back of
his hand, as though he were trying to quieten a horse preparing to take
the bit between its teeth: ‘Don’t rush things (over the bill), gently,
very gently does it.’ Then, as the waiter went off, armed with this
_aide-mémoire_, Aimé, fearing that his injunctions might not be strictly
adhered to, called him back: ‘Wait, I’m going to reckon it up myself.’
And as I was telling him that it was no matter: ‘I hold it as a
principle that, in the common parlance, one mustn’t fleece a guest.’ As
for the manager, seeing my guest’s simple clothes, always the same and
somewhat threadbare (yet no one would have been more adept at the art of
dressing ostentatiously, like one of Balzac’s dandies, had he had the
means), he contented himself, on my account, with inspecting from a
distance to see that everything was in order, and by a glance, getting a
wedge set beneath one of the legs of the table which was not level. It
was not that he would have been unable, although he had concealed his
origins as a dishwasher, to lend a hand like anyone else. It required
some exceptional circumstance, however, for him one day to carve the
guinea-fowls himself. I had gone out but I learned that he had done so
with a sacerdotal majesty, surrounded, at a respectful distance from the
sideboard, by a ring of waiters less intent on learning thereby than on
letting themselves be seen, and who appeared vacuously admiring. Seen,
however, by the manager (plunging with a slow gesture into the flanks of
his victims, and no more removing from them eyes imbued with his high
office than if an augury were to be read there), they were not. The
sacrificer did not even remark my own absence. When he learned of it, he
was desolate. ‘What, you didn’t see me carve the guinea-fowls myself?’ I
replied that, having not been able thus far to see Rome, Venice, Siena,
the Prado, the Dresden museum, India, or Sarah in _Phèdre_, I knew all
about resignation and that I would add his carving of the guinea-fowls
to my list. The comparison with the dramatic art (Sarah in _Phèdre_) was
the only one he appeared to understand, for he knew through me that, on
days of gala performances, the elder Coquelin⁵⁸ had accepted beginners’
roles, even that of a character who has only one line or no lines at
all. ‘It’s no matter, I’m distressed for your sake. When shall I carve
again? It would require an event, it would require a war.’ (It required
in fact the Armistice.) From that day forward, the calendar was changed,
and was reckoned thus: ‘It was the day after the day when I carved the
guinea-fowls myself.’ ‘It was a week to the day after the manager carved
the guinea-fowls himself.’ This prosectomy thus provided, like the birth
of Christ or the Hegira, the starting-point for a calendar different
from the others, but which did not achieve their extension nor match
their duration.

The sadness of M. de Crécy’s life derived, equally as much as from his
no longer keeping horses or a succulent table, from rubbing shoulders
only with people capable of believing that Cambremer and Guermantes were
all one. When he found that I knew that Legrandin, who now styled
himself Legrand de Méséglise, had no sort of title to it, and being
inflamed moreover by the wine he was drinking, he experienced a sort of
transport of delight. His sister used to say to me with a knowing look:
‘My brother’s never so happy as when he can talk with you.’ He had felt
himself to exist indeed since discovering someone who knew how
second-rate the Cambremers were, and how grand the Guermantes, someone
for whom the social world existed. Just so, following a conflagration of
all the libraries on the globe, and the rise of a wholly ignorant race,
might an old Latinist regain his footing and his trust in life on
hearing someone quote him a line from Horace. And so, if he never left
the compartment without saying to me: ‘When’s our next little
get-together to be?’, it was as much from the gourmandise of a scholar
as the avidity of a parasite, and because he saw these Balbec agapes as
an opportunity to talk, at the same time, about subjects close to his
heart that he could not talk about with anyone else, and analogous in
this to the dinners at which the Société des Bibliophiles gathers, on
certain fixed dates, at the especially succulent board of the Cercle de
l’Union.⁵⁹ Very unassuming where his own family was concerned, it was
not through M. de Crécy that I learned that it was very grand and a
genuine offshoot in France of the English family that bears the title of
Crécy. When I learned that he was a true Crécy, I told him that a niece
of Mme de Guermantes had married an American by the name of Charles
Crécy and said that I supposed there was no connection with himself.
‘None, he said. Any more than – though my family’s not so very
illustrious in any case – the many Americans calling themselves
Montgommery, Berry, Chandos or Capel have any connection with the
families of Pembroke, Buckingham or Essex, or with the Duc de Berry.’⁶⁰
I thought several times of telling him, to amuse him, that I had known
Mme Swann who, as a cocotte, had gone in the old days under the name of
Odette de Crécy; but although the Duc d’Alençon may not have taken
offence had anyone spoken of Emilienne d’Alençon,⁶¹ I did not feel
sufficiently well in with M. de Crécy to carry the joke as far as that.
‘He comes from a very great family, M. de Montsurvent said to me one
day. His patronymic is Saylor.’ And he added that on his old _castel_
above Incarville, grown all but uninhabitable in fact and which,
although born very wealthy, he was today too penniless to repair, there
could still be read his family’s ancient motto. I thought this motto
very fine, whether it be applied to the impatience of a predatory race
perched in that eyrie from which they must once have taken flight, or,
today, to the contemplation of its decline, and the anticipation of
impending death in that savage and imposing retreat. It is in this
double sense indeed that the motto makes play with the name of Saylor:
‘_Ne sçais l’heure_.’⁶²

At Hermonville M. de Chevregny sometimes got in, whose name, Brichot
told us, signified, like that of Mgr de Cabrières, ‘a place where goats
gather’. He was related to the Cambremers, on which account, and out of
a false appreciation of what was fashionable, the latter frequently
invited him to Féterne, but only when they had no guests to dazzle.
Living all year round at Beausoleil, M. de Chevregny had remained more
provincial than they were. Thus, when he went to spend a few weeks in
Paris, there was not a single day to be wasted, on account of ‘all there
was to see’; to the point where, at times, a little dazed by the number
of spectacles too rapidly digested, when he was asked whether he had
seen a certain play, it happened that he was no longer quite sure. But
this vagueness was rare, for he had that detailed knowledge of things
Parisian peculiar to the people who rarely go there. He recommended to
me the ‘new things’ to go and see (‘It’s worth the effort’), regarding
them on the other hand purely from the point of view of the pleasant
evening they enabled you to spend, and ignoring the aesthetic point of
view to the point of not even suspecting that they might in fact
constitute a ‘new thing’ in the history of art. Thus, speaking of
everything on the same plane, he would say: ‘We went once to the
Opéra-Comique, but the show isn’t up to much. It’s called _Pelléas et
Mélisande_. It’s insignificant. Périer⁶³ is always good, but you’d do
better to see him in something else. On the other hand, at the Gymnase,
they’re doing _La Châtelaine_.⁶⁴ We went back twice; don’t fail to go,
it’s worth seeing; and then the acting is a joy; you’ve got Frévalles,
Marie Magnier, Baron _fils_;⁶⁵ he even quoted the names of actors to me
that I had never heard spoken, and without preceding them by Monsieur,
Madame or Mademoiselle, as the Duc de Guermantes would have done, who
referred in the same ceremoniously contemptuous tone to the ‘songs of
Mademoiselle Yvette Guilbert’⁶⁶ and ‘the experiments of Monsieur
Charcot’. That was not M. de Chevregny’s way, he said Cornaglia and
Dehelly⁶⁷ as he might have said Voltaire and Montesquieu. For with him,
in respect of actors as of everything to do with Paris, the aristocrat’s
desire to display his contempt came second to the provincial man’s
desire to show familiarity.

Straight after the first dinner-party that I had been to at La
Raspelière, with what was still referred to at Féterne as ‘the young
couple’, although M. and Mme Cambremer were no longer, far from it, in
the first flush of youth, the old Marquise had written me one of those
letters whose style you could have picked out from among thousands. It
said: ‘Bring your delightful – charming – agreeable cousin. It will be
an enchantment, a pleasure’, always failing so infallibly to achieve the
progression anticipated by whoever received the letter that I ended by
altering my opinion as to the nature of these diminuendos, believing
them now to be deliberate, and finding in them the same depravation of
taste – transposed into the social order – that drove Sainte-Beuve to
break all the alliances between words and to alter any expression that
was in the least usual. Two methods, taught no doubt by different
teachers, were contrasted in this epistolary style, the second of them
leading Mme de Cambremer to redeem the banality of her multiple
adjectives by employing them on a descending scale and avoiding ending
on a common chord. On the other hand, I tended to see in these inverse
gradations, no longer refinement, as when they were the work of the
dowager Marquise, but awkwardness, every time they were employed by her
son the Marquis or by her cousins. For throughout the family, to quite a
remote degree and in admiring imitation of Aunt Zélia, the
three-adjective rule was held in high esteem, as was a certain
enthusiastic way of catching your breath when speaking. An imitation
that had passed into the blood, what was more; when in the family, a
girl, from childhood on, broke off from speaking to swallow her saliva,
they would say: ‘She takes after Aunt Zélia’, and felt that later on her
lips would quite soon tend to be shadowed by a faint moustache and
promised themselves they would cultivate the aptitude that she must show
for music. It was not long before the Cambremers’ relations with Mme
Verdurin were less ideal than with myself, for various reasons. They
wanted to invite her. The ‘young’ Marquise said to me contemptuously: ‘I
don’t see why we shouldn’t invite the woman; you can see anyone at all
in the country, it doesn’t lead to anything.’ But somewhat impressed
deep down, they never ceased consulting me as to the manner in which
they should realize their desire to be polite. As they had invited us,
Albertine and me, to dinner, with some friends of Saint-Loup’s,
fashionable people from the region, the owners of the château in
Gourville, who represented rather more than the cream of Norman society,
to which Mme Verdurin, without appearing to touch it, was partial, I
advised the Cambremers to invite the Patronne at the same time. But the
châtelains of Féterne, from fear (so timid were they) of upsetting their
noble friends, or (so naïve were they) of M. and Mme Verdurin being
bored by people who were not intellectuals, or again (so impregnated
were they by a spirit of routine that experience had not fertilized) of
mixing kinds and ‘putting their foot in it’, declared that they would
not go together, that they would not ‘hit it off’, and that it would be
better to keep Mme Verdurin (who would be invited with all her little
group) in reserve for another dinner-party. For the next one – the
fashionable one, with Saint-Loup’s friends – they invited only Morel
from the little nucleus, so that M. de Charlus might be informed
indirectly of the brilliant people whom they entertained, and also so
that the musician might be a source of entertainment for the guests, for
he would be asked to bring his violin. To him they added Cottard,
because M. de Cambremer declared that he was a livewire and ‘an asset’
at a dinner-party; besides, it might prove convenient to be on good
terms with a doctor should they ever have someone who was ill. But he
was asked on his own, so as ‘not to start anything with the wife’. Mme
Verdurin was outraged when she learned that two members of the little
group had been invited without her to an ‘informal dinner’ at Féterne.
She dictated to the Doctor, whose first instinct had been to accept, a
haughty reply, in which he said: ‘_We_ are dining that evening at Mme
Verdurin’s’, a plural intended as a lesson to the Cambremers and to show
them he was not separable from Mme Cottard. As for Morel, Mme Verdurin
had no need to trace out an impolite course of action for him, he
adopted one spontaneously, and for the following reason. If, in regard
to M. de Charlus, and where his pleasures were concerned, he enjoyed an
independence that saddened the Baron, we have seen that the latter’s
influence made itself felt more in other spheres, that he had, for
example, broadened the virtuoso’s musical knowledge and purified his
style. But, at this point in our story at least, it was still only an
influence. There was one terrain on the other hand where what M. de
Charlus said was believed and acted on blindly by Morel. Blindly and
crazily, for not only were M. de Charlus’s teachings false, but, even
had they been valid for a great nobleman, as applied to the letter by
Morel they became ludicrous. The terrain on which Morel had become so
credulous and so easily led by his mentor, was that of society. The
violinist, who, before he met M. de Charlus, had had no notion of
society, had taken literally the arrogant and summary sketch-map of it
drawn for him by the Baron: ‘There are a certain number of preponderant
families, M. de Charlus had told him, the Guermantes above all, who can
count fourteen alliances with the House of France, which is flattering
mainly in fact for the House of France, moreover, for it was to Aldonce
de Guermantes and not to Louis the Fat, his younger half-brother, that
the throne of France should have passed.⁶⁸ Under Louis XIV, we wore
black at the death of Monsieur, as having the same grandmother as the
King. Far beneath the Guermantes, one can nevertheless cite the La
Tremoïlles, descendants of the Kings of Naples and the Comtes de
Poitiers;⁶⁹ the d’Uzès,⁷⁰ far from ancient as a family but the most
ancient peers; the Luynes,⁷¹ altogether recent, but with the distinction
of great alliances; the Choiseuls, the Harcourts, the La
Rochefoucaulds.⁷² Add the Noailles, despite the Comte de Toulouse, the
Montesquious, the Castellanes⁷³ and, barring some oversight, that’s all.
As for all those nobodies who call themselves the Marquis de Cambremerde
or de Vatefairefiche,⁷⁴ there’s no difference between them and the
meanest private in your regiment. Whether you go and piss at the
Comtesse Shit’s, or shit at the Comtesse Piss’s, it’s the same thing,
you’ll have risked your reputation and used a brown-stained rag as
toilet paper. Which is unhygienic.’ Morel had piously taken in this
perhaps somewhat cursory history lesson; he judged things as if he were
himself a Guermantes and hoped for an opportunity of finding himself
with the false La Tour d’Auvergnes so that he could let them see, by a
contemptuous shake of the hand, that he hardly took them seriously. As
for the Cambremers, he could show them here and now that they were ‘no
better than the meanest private in his regiment’. He did not reply to
their invitation, and on the evening of the dinner begged off at the
very last moment by telegram, as overjoyed as if he had just behaved
like a prince of the blood. It must be added, however, that one cannot
imagine just how, in a more general way, unbearable, niggling and even,
he who was so discerning, stupid M. de Charlus could be, on all those
occasions when the defects of his character came into play. It can be
said indeed that these are like an intermittent sickness of the mind.
Who has not observed this fact with women, or even with men, endowed
with a remarkable intelligence, but afflicted by nervousness? When they
are happy, at peace, satisfied by their surroundings, they cause us to
admire their precious gifts; it is literally the truth that speaks
through their mouths. A migraine, some small puncturing of their
_amour-propre_ is enough to change everything. The luminous
intelligence, abrupt, convulsive, shrunken, now reflects only a self
that is irritated, suspicious, coquettish, doing all it can to be
unattractive. The anger of the Cambremers ran high; and in the
meanwhile, other incidents led to a certain tension in their relations
with the little clan. As we were returning, the Cottards, Charlus,
Brichot, Morel and I, from a dinner at La Raspelière, and the
Cambremers, who had been going to have lunch with some friends in
Arembouville, had made part of the outward journey with us: ‘You who are
so fond of Balzac and able to recognize him in contemporary society, I
had said to M. de Charlus, you must think that the Cambremers have
escaped from the _Scènes de la vie de province_.’⁷⁵ But M. de Charlus,
absolutely as if he had been their friend and as if I had offended him
by my remark, abruptly cut me short: ‘You’re saying that because the
wife is superior to the husband, he said curtly. – Oh, I didn’t mean
that she was the ‘Muse du département’, nor Madame de Bargeton,⁷⁶
although…’ M. de Charlus interrupted me once more: ‘Say rather Madame de
Mortsauf.’⁷⁷ The train stopped and Brichot got out. ‘No good our
signalling to you, you’re terrible. – What d’you mean? – Oh come,
haven’t you noticed that Brichot is madly in love with Mme de
Cambremer?’ I could see by the attitude of the Cottards and of Charlie
that there was not a shred of doubt about this among the little nucleus.
I thought it showed ill-will on their part. ‘Come, you didn’t notice how
agitated he was when you were talking about her,’ M. de Charlus went on,
who liked to show that he had experience of women and spoke naturally of
the sentiment they inspire, as if it were one that he himself was in the
habit of feeling. But a certain tone of equivocal fatherliness with all
the young men – despite his exclusive love for Morel – gave the lie by
his tone to the lady’s-man views he was expressing: ‘Oh, these children,
he said, in a high-pitched, affected, measured voice, you have to teach
them everything, they’re innocent as a new-born babe, they can’t
recognize when a man’s in love with a woman. I knew what’s what better
than that at your age,’ he added, for he liked using these expressions
from the world of the Paris apaches, perhaps from taste, perhaps so as
not to appear, by avoiding them, to be admitting that he associated with
those whose current vocabulary they were. A few days later, I had indeed
to yield to the evidence and recognize that Brichot was smitten with the
Marquise. Unfortunately, he accepted several lunch invitations from her.
Mme Verdurin adjudged that it was time to put her oar in. Apart from the
usefulness she could see in an intervention where the politics of the
little nucleus was concerned, she took an increasingly keen enjoyment in
these sorts of explanation and the dramas they gave rise to, an
enjoyment born of idleness as much among the bourgeoisie as in the world
of the aristocracy. It was a day of high emotion at La Raspelière when
Mme Verdurin was seen to disappear for a whole hour with Brichot, whom
she was known to have told that Mme de Cambremer made fun of him, that
he was the laughing-stock of her drawing-room, that he was about to
dishonour his old age and jeopardize his position in academic life. She
even went so far as to refer in touching terms to the washerwoman he had
lived with in Paris and to their little girl. She carried the day,
Brichot stopped going to Féterne, but his unhappiness was such that for
two days it was thought he was going to lose his sight altogether, and
his malady had in any case taken a leap forward from which there was no
going back. Meanwhile, the Cambremers, whose anger against Morel was
great, invited M. de Charlus one time, and very deliberately, without
him. Not receiving any reply from the Baron, they feared they had made a
gaffe, and deciding that resentment was a poor counsellor, wrote rather
belatedly to Morel, an obsequiousness that made M. de Charlus smile by
revealing the extent of his influence. ‘You will answer for the two of
us, that I accept,’ the Baron told Morel. The day of the dinner having
arrived, they were waiting in the large drawing-room at Féterne. The
Cambremers were in point of fact giving the dinner for the flower of
fashion that were M. and Mme Féré. But so afraid were they of
displeasing M. de Charlus that, although she had met the Férés through
M. de Chevregny, Mme de Cambremer became frantic when, on the day of the
dinner, she found the latter arriving to pay a call on them at Féterne.
They invented all manner of excuses to send him back to Beausoleil as
quickly as possible, not quickly enough, however, to stop him running
into the Férés in the courtyard, who were as shocked to see him being
expelled as he was ashamed. But whatever the cost, the Cambremers wanted
to spare M. de Charlus the sight of M. de Chevregny, judging the latter
to be provincial on the strength of nuances that are overlooked _en
famille_ and of which account is taken only in the presence of
outsiders, the very people who would alone fail to notice them. But we
do not like to show off to them relations who have remained what we have
tried hard to cease from being. As for M. and Mme Féré, they were in the
highest degree people out of what is called ‘the top drawer’. In the
eyes of those who described them thus, no doubt the Guermantes, the
Rohans and many others were also people out of the top drawer, but their
name excused you from saying so. Since not everyone knew of the high
birth of M. Féré’s mother, or of Mme Féré’s mother, and the
extraordinarily closed circle in which she and her husband moved, when
they had just been introduced, in order to explain, it was always added
that they were people ‘of the very best kind’. Had their obscure name
dictated a sort of haughty reserve in them? The fact was that the Férés
did not visit people whom the La Tremoïlles would have frequented. It
had taken her position as queen of the sea-side, which the old Marquise
de Cambremer held in the Manche, for the Férés to come to one of her
matinées each year. They had been invited to dinner and great store was
laid on the effect that M. de Charlus would have on them. It was given
out discreetly that he would be among the guests. By chance, Mme Féré
did not know him. Mme de Cambremer experienced a keen satisfaction at
this, and the smile of the chemist who is about to bring into contact
for the first time two especially important bodies strayed across her
face. The door opened and Mme de Cambremer almost felt sick when she saw
Morel enter alone. Like a private secretary charged with making his
minister’s apologies, or like a morganatic spouse expressing the
Prince’s regrets that he is feeling unwell (as Mme de Clinchamp used to
do in respect of the Duc d’Aumale),⁷⁸ Morel said, in the airiest of
tones: ‘The Baron won’t be able to come. He’s slightly indisposed, at
least I think that’s the reason; I haven’t come across him this week,’
he added, these last words causing Mme de Cambremer quite to despair,
she having told M. and Mme Féré that Morel saw M. de Charlus at all
hours of the day. The Cambremers pretended that the Baron’s absence
merely added to the pleasures of the occasion and, without letting
themselves be overheard by Morel, said to their guests: ‘We can make do
without him, can we not? I’ll be all the pleasanter.’ But they were
furious, suspecting a conspiracy mounted by Mme Verdurin and, tit for
tat, when the latter invited them once again to La Raspelière, M. de
Cambremer, unable to resist the pleasure of revisiting his house and of
finding himself once again amongst the little group, went, but alone,
saying that the Marquise was most upset, but that her doctor had ordered
her to keep to her room. By this half-presence, the Cambremers thought
both to teach M. de Charlus a lesson and to show the Verdurins that only
a limited politeness was due to them, just as in the old days princesses
of the blood used to escort duchesses out, but only as far as half-way
across the second chamber. After a few weeks, the breach was more or
less complete. M. de Cambremer justified it to me thus: ‘I must tell you
that with M. de Charlus it was difficult. He’s an out-and-out
Dreyfusard… – Not so! – Oh yes, he is…, at all events, his cousin the
Prince de Guermantes is, they’ve met with a fair bit of hostility on
that account. I’ve relations who are very touchy about that. I can’t mix
with such people, I’d fall out with the whole of my family. – Since the
Prince de Guermantes is a Dreyfusard, it’ll go all the better, said Mme
de Cambremer, because Saint-Loup, who, they say, is to marry his niece,
is one, too. It could even be the reason for the marriage. – Come, my
dear, don’t say that Saint-Loup, of whom we’re so fond, is a Dreyfusard.
You shouldn’t broadcast these allegations lightly, said M. de Cambremer.
What might they not think of him in the Army! – He was one, but he isn’t
any longer, I said to M. de Cambremer. As for his marrying Mlle de
Guermantes-Brassac, is that true? – It’s all people talk about, but
you’re in a good position to know. – But I say again, he told me himself
he was a Dreyfusard, said Mme de Cambremer. He’s got every excuse
anyway, the Guermantes are half-German. – In the case of the rue de
Varenne Guermantes, you can say one hundred per cent, said Cancan. But
Saint-Loup’s a different kettle of fish; he may well have any number of
German relations, but his father claimed his title above all as a great
French nobleman, he served again in 1871 and was killed in the finest
manner during the war. I may well fuss too much about that sort of
thing, but one mustn’t exaggerate either in one direction or the other.
_In medio… virtus_,⁷⁹ oh, I don’t remember! It’s something Doctor
Cottard says. He’s never at a loss for the right words. You ought to
have a Petit Larousse here.’ To avoid having to pronounce on the Latin
quotation, and to get off the subject of Saint-Loup, on which her
husband seemed to find her lacking in tact, Mme de Cambremer fell back
on the Patronne, whose quarrel with them was even more in need of an
explanation. ‘We were happy to lease La Raspelière to Mme Verdurin, said
the Marquise. Only she has appeared to think that, along with the house,
and everything she’s found a way of laying claim to, the use of the
meadow, the old hangings, all things that certainly weren’t in the
lease, she’d have in addition the right to become friends with us. Those
are two quite distinct things. Our mistake is simply not to have done
things through a factor or an agency. At Féterne that’s of no account,
but I can see now the expression on my Aunt de Ch’nouville’s face if she
saw old Mother Verdurin turning up on my at-home day, with her hair all
over the place. In the case of M. de Charlus, of course, he knows some
highly respectable people, but he also knows some who were far from it.’
I asked who. Pressed by questions, Mme de Cambremer finally said: ‘They
claim it’s he who was keeping a Monsieur Moreau, Morille, Morue,⁸⁰ I no
longer know. No connection, of course, with Morel, the violinist, she
added, blushing. When I sensed that Mme Verdurin imagined that, because
she was our tenant in the Manche, she’d have the right to call on me in
Paris, I realized we had to cut our moorings.’

Despite this breach with the Patronne, the Cambremers were on good
enough terms with the faithful, and gladly got into our carriage when
they were on the line. When we were on the point of arriving in
Douville, Albertine, pulling her mirror out for one last time, sometimes
found it helpful to change her gloves or remove her hat for a moment,
and with the tortoiseshell comb I had given her and which she wore in
her hair, would smooth down her ringlets, fluff them up, and, if
necessary, put up her chignon above the undulations that descended in
regular valleys as far as her nape. Once in the carriages that were
waiting for us, we no longer had any idea at all where we were; the
roads were not lit; we could tell by the louder sound the wheels made
that we were passing through a village, we thought we had arrived, we
found ourselves in open country again, we could hear church-bells in the
distance, we forgot we were in dinner-jackets, and we had almost dozed
off when, at the end of this long margin of darkness which, because of
the distance we had travelled and the incidents characteristic of any
journey by train, seemed to have borne us on to an advanced hour of the
night and almost half-way back towards Paris, all of a sudden, after we
felt the carriage glide on a finer sand, revealing that we had just
entered the park, there burst forth, reintroducing us into the life of
society, the brilliant lights of the drawing-room, then of the
dining-room, where we were suddenly made to recoil by hearing it strike
eight, an hour we thought long since past, whereas the numerous courses
and fine wines were about to follow one another, around men in tails and
women semi-décolletées, in a dinner rutilant with light, like a true
_dîner en ville_, which was surrounded only, and had its character
thereby altered, by the strange, sombre double sash woven by the
nocturnal, pastoral and marine hours, deflected by this worldly use from
their original solemnity, of the double journey. This latter obliged us
indeed to abandon the radiant, quickly forgotten splendour of the
brightly lit drawing-room for the carriages, where I contrived to be
with Albertine so that my loved one might not be with other people
without me, and frequently for another reason also, which was that we
could the two of us do lots of things in a dark carriage, where the
jolts of the descent would anyway excuse us, in the event of a sudden
shaft of light entering, for our having clutched hold of one another.
When M. de Cambremer had not as yet fallen out with the Verdurins, he
used to ask me: ‘You don’t think, with this fog, that you’ll have one of
your breathless attacks? My sister had terrible ones this morning. Ah,
you did, too, he would say, with satisfaction. I shall tell her so
tonight. I know that when I get back she’ll be inquiring straight away
how long it is since you had them.’ He talked to me about mine in fact
only in order to get on to those of his sister, and made me describe the
particulars of the first the better to mark the differences there were
between the two. In spite of these, as his sister’s attacks seemed to
him to carry authority, he could not believe that what ‘worked’ with
hers was not advisable for my own and he was annoyed that I should not
have tried them, for there is one thing even more difficult than
sticking to a regimen and that is not imposing it on others. ‘Anyway,
what am I saying, me, a layman, when you’re here in front of the
Areopagus, the very fountainhead. What does Professor Cottard think?’

I saw his wife again another time, it so happens, because she had said
that my ‘cousin’ had a funny way with her and I wanted to know what she
meant by this. She denied having said it, but finally owned that she had
been talking about someone whom she thought she had met with my cousin.
She did not know her name but said finally that, if she was not
mistaken, it was the wife of a banker, of the name of Lina, Linette,
Lisette, Lia, or something of the sort. I fancied that ‘wife of a
banker’ was put in only in order to remove any marks of identity. I
wanted to ask Albertine whether it was true. But I preferred appearing
to be the one who knew rather than the one asking questions. Albertine
would in any case either not have given me any answer or else a ‘no’ in
which the _n_ would have been too hesitant and the _o_ too resonant.
Albertine never recounted facts that might harm her, but others which
could only be explained by the earlier ones, the truth being a current
which flows from what we are told and which we pick up, invisible though
it is, rather than the actual thing we have been told. Thus, when I
assured her that a woman whom she had met in Vichy was disreputable, she
swore that the woman in question was certainly not what I imagined and
had never tried to make her do anything bad. But another day she added,
when I was speaking of my curiosity regarding that sort of person, that
the lady in Vichy had a friend like that whom Albertine did not meet,
but to whom the lady had ‘_promised_ to introduce her’. For her to have
made such a promise, must mean that Albertine had wanted it, or that the
lady had, by so offering, known how to please her. But if I had raised
this objection with Albertine, I would have seemed to have had my
revelations from her alone, I would at once have put a stop to them, I
would have learned nothing further, I would have ceased to make myself
feared. Moreover, we were in Balbec and the Vichy lady and her friend
lived in Menton; the remoteness, the impossibility of any danger, would
have soon put an end to my suspicions.

Often, when M. de Cambremer hailed me from the station, I had, with
Albertine, just been taking advantage of the darkness, and with all the
more difficulty inasmuch as the latter had fought somewhat, fearing it
was not sufficiently total. ‘You know I’m sure that Cottard saw us;
anyway, even without seeing, he certainly heard you choking back your
voice, just when they were talking about your other sort of choking,’
Albertine said to me on arrival at the station in Douville, where we
caught the little train for the return journey. But this return journey,
like the outward one, if, by giving me a certain impression of poetry,
it reawoke in me the longing to travel, to lead a new life, and thereby
made me wish to abandon any plan of marrying Albertine, and even to
break off our relationship once and for all, it also, by the very fact
of this relationship’s contradictory nature, made the break easier. For
on the return journey, as on the outward one, at each station there
either got in with us or greeted us from the platform people of our
acquaintance; the furtive pleasures of the imagination were dominated by
the – continual – pleasures of sociability, which are so calming, so
soporific. Already, before the stations themselves, their names (which
had so set me to dreaming ever since the day I first heard them, on that
first evening when I had been travelling with my grandmother) had been
humanized, had lost their strangeness since the evening when Brichot, at
Albertine’s request, had explained their etymologies to us more fully. I
had found the -_fleur_ charming that ended certain names, such as
Fiquefleur, Honfleur, Flers, Barfleur, Harfleur and so on, and the
-_boeuf_ to be found at the end of Bricqueboeuf amusing. But the _fleur_
vanished along with the _boeuf_ when Brichot (and he had told me this
that first day, in the train) taught us that ‘_fleur_’ means ‘harbour’
(like _fiord_) and that ‘_boeuf_’, _budh_ in Norman, signifies ‘hut’. As
he cited various examples, what had seemed to me particular became
general: Bricqueboeuf went to join Elbeuf, and even in a name at first
sight as individual as the place itself, such as the name of Pennedepie,
in which oddities impossible of elucidation by the reason seemed to have
become amalgamated since time immemorial into a vocable as hard,
strong-tasting and unpleasant as a certain Normandy cheese, I was
distressed to discover the Gallic _pen_, which signifies ‘mountain’ and
is found in Penmarch as well as in the Apennines. As, each time the
train stopped, I felt that we should have friendly hands to shake, if
not visits to receive, I said to Albertine: ‘Hurry up and ask Brichot
the names you want to know about. You mentioned
Marcouville-l’Orgueilleuse. – Yes, I just love that _orgueil_, it’s a
proud village, said Albertine. – You’d think it prouder still, replied
Brichot, if, instead of its French form, or even the Low Latin, such as
you find it in the Bishop of Bayeux’s cartulary, _Marcovilla superba_,
you were to take the more ancient form, closer to the Norman,
_Marculphivilla superba_, the village, or domain, of Merculph. In almost
all these names that end in -_ville_, you can still see, erect above
this coast, the ghost of the rude Norman invaders. At Hermonville, you
had, standing in the carriage doorway, only our excellent Doctor, who,
obviously, has nothing of the Norse chieftain about him. But by closing
your eyes, you might have seen the celebrated Herimund
(_Herimundivilla_). Although, I don’t know why, people go by these
roads, in between Loigny and Balbec-Plage, rather than the very
picturesque ones that go from Loigny to old Balbec, Mme Verdurin has
perhaps taken you out in that direction by carriage. In which case
you’ll have seen Incarville or the village of Wiscar, and Tourville,
before you get to Mme Verdurin’s, is the village of Turold. Moreover,
there weren’t only the Normans. It seems that Germans may have got this
far (Aumenancourt, _Alemanicurtis_); don’t tell this to the young
officer I see there; he’d be capable of refusing to go to his cousins’
any more. There were Saxons, too, witness the fountain of Sissonne (one
of Mme Verdurin’s favourite destinations for her excursions, and rightly
so), just like in England, Middlesex and Wessex. Something inexplicable,
it seems that the Goths, ‘_gueux_’ as they used to say, got this far,
and even Moors, for Mortagne comes from _Mauretania_. The trace of them
has remained in Gourville (_Gothorumvilla_). The odd vestige of the
Latins survives, too, moreover, Lagny (_Latiniacum_). –I shall ask for
an explanation of Thorpehomme, said M. de Charlus. I can understand
“_homme_”, he added, as the sculptor and Cottard exchanged meaningful
glances. But Thorp? – “_Homme_” does not at all signify what you are
naturally led to believe, Baron, replied Brichot, glancing mischievously
at Cottard and the sculptor. “_Homme_” has nothing to do in this case
with the sex to which I am not indebted for my mother. “_Homme_” is
_Holm_, which signifies “small island”, and so on. As for _Thorp_, or
“village”, you find it again in dozens of words with which I’ve already
bored our young friend. So in Thorpehomme there isn’t the name of a
Norman chieftain, but words of the Norman tongue. You can see how this
whole region was Germanized. – I think he’s exaggerating, said M. de
Charlus. Yesterday, I went to Orgeville – This time I give you back the
man I took away in Thorpehomme, Baron. Let it be said without pedantry,
a charter of Robert I gives us, for Orgeville, the domain of Otger. All
these names are those of ancient lords. Octeville-la-Venelle is for
l’Avenel. The Avenels were a family well known in the Middle Ages.
Bourguenolles, which Mme Verdurin took us to the other day, used to be
written “Bourg de Môles”, because the village belonged in the eleventh
century to Baudoin de Môles, as did La Chaise-Baudoin; but here we are
in Doncières. – Good Lord, all the lieutenants that are going to try and
get in!, said M. de Charlus in mock terror. I’m thinking of you, it
doesn’t trouble me as I’m getting out. – You hear, Doctor? said Brichot.
The Baron’s afraid of having officers clambering over his person. Yet
they’re quite in character, by being here in strength, for Doncières is
none other than Saint-Cyr,⁸¹ _Dominus Cyriacus_. There are lots of names
of towns in which _sanctus_ and _sancta_ have been replaced by _dominus_
and _domina_. Moreover, this peaceful Army town sometimes gives a false
impression of being Saint-Cyr, Versailles or even Fontainebleau.

During these homeward journeys (as on the outward one), I used to tell
Albertine to dress herself, for I knew very well that at Amnancourt,
Doncières, Epreville and Saint-Vast, we would be receiving brief visits.
I did not find these at all disagreeable, as it happens, whether it was,
at Hermonville (the domain of Herimund), that of M. de Chevregny, taking
advantage of having come to fetch guests to ask me to go and have lunch
the following day at Montsurvent, or, at Doncières, the abrupt invasion
of one of Saint-Loup’s charming friends, sent by him (if he was not
free) to pass on an invitation from Captain de Borodino, from the
officers’ mess at the Coq Hardi, or from the NCOs at the Faisan Doré.
Saint-Loup often came in person, and all the time he was there, without
it being apparent to anyone, I held Albertine captive with my eyes,
pointlessly vigilant as it happens. On one occasion, however, I
interrupted my watch. The stop being prolonged, Bloch, having greeted
us, ran off almost immediately to rejoin his father, who had just
inherited from his uncle and, having leased a château called ‘La
Commanderie’, thought it very much the grand seigneur to travel about
only in a post-chaise, with postilions in livery. Bloch asked me to go
with him as far as the carriage. ‘But make haste, for these quadrupeds
are impatient; come, man beloved of the gods, you will bring pleasure to
my father.’ But I could not bear to leave Albertine in the train with
Saint-Loup, they might, while my back was turned, talk together, get
into another carriage, smile at one another, touch one another; my
adhesive gaze could not be removed from Albertine for as long as
Saint-Loup was there. But I could see very well that Bloch, who had
asked me as a favour to go and greet his father, found it first of all
unfriendly that I should refuse when nothing was stopping me, the
porters having warned us that the train would be remaining for another
quarter of an hour at least in the station, and that almost all the
passengers, without whom it would not leave, had alighted; and for
another thing he did not doubt that it was definitely because – my
conduct on this occasion was a decisive response – I was a snob. For he
was not unaware of the names of the people I was with. Indeed, M. de
Charlus had said to me, some time before and not remembering or caring
that this had been done in the old days, in order to get close to him:
‘But introduce me to your friend then, what you’re doing shows a lack of
respect for me,’ and he had talked with Bloch, with whom he seemed
exceedingly taken, to the point where he had gratified him with an ‘I
shall hope to meet you again.’ ‘It’s irrevocable then, you refuse to
walk those hundred metres to say hallo to my father, to whom it’d give
so much pleasure?’ Bloch said. I was unhappy at seeming to be failing in
comradeship, and even more so at the reason Bloch imagined I had for
failing in it, and at sensing that he supposed I was not the same with
my bourgeois friends when people of ‘birth’ were present. From that day
forward, he ceased to show me the same affection and, what I found more
hurtful, no longer had the same high regard for my character. But in
order to undeceive him as to the motive that had led me to remain in the
train, I would have needed to tell him something – namely, that I was
jealous of Albertine – that would have been even more painful than
allowing him to believe that I was stupidly worldly. Thus it is that, in
theory, we find we ought always to explain ourselves frankly, to avoid
misunderstandings. But very often life combines these in such a way
that, in order to dispel them, in the rare circumstances when that might
prove possible, we would have to reveal either – which was not the case
here – something that would offend our friend even more than the
imaginary wrong he imputes to us, or a secret the divulging of which –
this was what had just happened in my own case – strikes us as even
worse than the misunderstanding. Moreover, even without explaining to
Bloch, since I was unable to, the reason I had for not accompanying him,
had I begged him not to be offended, I would merely have doubled the
offence by showing that I had been aware of it. There was nothing to be
done but to submit to this _fatum_ which had decreed that the presence
of Albertine should prevent me from escorting him and that he should
believe that, on the contrary, it was the presence of brilliant people
who, had they been a hundred times more so, would have simply had the
effect of making me concern myself exclusively with Bloch and reserve
all my courtesies for him. It is thus enough that, accidentally,
absurdly, an incident (in this case, the coming together of Albertine
and Saint-Loup) should interpose itself between two destinies whose
lines had been converging for these to be made to deviate, to grow
further and further apart and never approach one another again. And
there are more beautiful friendships than that of Bloch with myself
which have found themselves destroyed, without the involuntary author of
the quarrel having ever been able to explain to the one quarrelled with
what would surely have healed his _amour-propre_ and retrieved his
fugitive sympathy.

Friendships more beautiful than Bloch’s would not be saying very much,
on the other hand. He had all the defects that displeased me the most.
My fondness for Albertine, it so happened, made them quite unbearable.
Thus, at that simple moment when I was talking with him while keeping an
eye on Robert, Bloch told me he had lunched at Mme Bontemps’s and that
everyone had talked about me in the most laudatory terms until ‘the
declension of Helios’. ‘Good, I thought, since Mme Bontemps thinks Bloch
is a genius, the enthusiastic vote of approval he will have given me
will do more than what all the others may have said, it’ll get back to
Albertine. She can’t fail to find out some day soon, and it surprises me
that her aunt hasn’t already repeated it to her, that I’m a “superior”
man.’ ‘Yes, added Bloch, everyone heaped praises on you. I alone
preserved a silence as profound as if I had absorbed, in place of the,
in fact somewhat mediocre, meal that we were served, the poppies beloved
of the blessed brother of Tanathos and Lethe, the divine Hypnos, who
envelops the body and the tongue in his sweet bonds. It’s not that I
admire you any less than the band of ravening dogs with whom I had been
invited. But I admire you because I understand you, and they admire you
without understanding you. The truth is, I admire you too much to speak
of you in that way in public, it would have seemed to me a profanation
to praise aloud what I carry in the deepest recesses of my heart. It was
in vain that they questioned me about you, a sacred Pudor, the daughter
of Kronion, made me remain mute.’ I was not so tasteless as to appear
disgruntled, but this particular Pudor seemed to me akin – much more
than to Kronion – to the reticence that prevents a critic who admires
you from talking about you because the secret temple where you sit
enthroned would be invaded by the mob of ignorant readers and
journalists; to the reticence of the statesman who does not give you a
decoration so that you should not be lost to view amidst people of less
worth than yourself; to the reticence of the Academician who does not
give you his vote, so as to spare you the shame of being the colleague
of X…, who is without talent; to the reticence finally, more respectable
yet more criminal, of the sons who beg you not to write about their late
father, who was full of fine qualities, in order to ensure silence and
repose, to prevent people maintaining him in life and creating a halo
around the poor dead man, who would rather have his name issuing from
men’s mouths than the wreaths borne, however piously, to his grave.

If Bloch, while distressing me by not being able to understand the
reason that had prevented me from going to salute his father, had
exasperated me by confessing that he had depreciated me at Mme
Bontemps’s (I now understood why Albertine had never alluded to that
lunch and remained silent when I spoke to her of Bloch’s affection for
me), the young Israelite had had an effect on M. de Charlus that was
anything but irritation. Certainly Bloch now believed, not only that I
could not for one second keep away from people of fashion, but that,
jealous of the overtures they might have made to him (like M. de
Charlus), I was trying to put a spoke in his wheel and prevent him from
becoming friendly with them; but for his part, the Baron regretted not
having seen more of my schoolfellow. As was his habit, he was careful
not to show it. He began by putting to me, without appearing to, a few
questions about Bloch, but in so offhand a tone and with an interest
that appeared so put on, that you would not have supposed that he was
attending to the answers. With an air of detachment, in a sing-song
voice expressive of more than indifference, of distraction, and as if
out of simple politeness towards myself: ‘He looks intelligent, he said
he was writing, has he any talent?’ I told M. de Charlus it had been
very good of him to say he hoped to meet him again. The Baron gave not
the slightest indication that he might have heard my words, and as I
repeated them four times without getting any reply, I finally suspected
I might have been the victim of an acoustic mirage when I thought I
heard what M. de Charlus had said. ‘Is he staying in Balbec?’ crooned
the Baron, with so uninquiring an expression it is unfortunate that the
French language has no sign other than the question-mark with which to
end these sentences that appear so unlike questions. It is true that
such a sign would be of scant use save to M. de Charlus. ‘No, they’re
renting near here, La Commanderie.’ Having learned what he wanted, M. de
Charlus pretended to despise Bloch. ‘How ghastly! he exclaimed,
restoring to his voice all its clarion vigour. All the localities or
properties called “La Commanderie” were built or owned by the Knights of
the Order of Malta (of whom I am one), just as the places known as “Le
Temple” or “La Cavalerie” were by the Templars. Were I staying at La
Commanderie, nothing could be more natural. But a Jew! Not, however,
that it surprises me; it comes from a curious liking for sacrilege,
peculiar to that race. As soon as a Jew has enough money to buy a
château, he always chooses one called Le Prieuré, l’Abbaye, Le
Monastère, La Maison-Dieu. I had dealings with a Jewish functionary, can
you guess where he resided? In Pont-l’Evêque.⁸² Having fallen out of
favour, he got himself sent to Brittany, to Pont-l’Abbé. When, in Holy
Week, they put on those indecent spectacles known as Passion plays, half
the auditorium is filled with Jews, exulting at the thought that they
are going to put Christ on the Cross for a second time, at least in
effigy. At the Lamoureux concerts, I had for my neighbour one day a rich
Jewish banker. They were giving Berlioz’s _L’Enfance du Christ_; he was
appalled. But he soon recovered the beatific expression that is usual
with him on hearing “L’Enchantement du Vendredi Saint”.⁸³ Your friend is
staying at La Commanderie, the wretch! What sadism! You must show me how
to get there, he added, resuming his indifferent air, so that I can go
one day and see how our ancient domains are withstanding such a
profanation. It’s unfortunate, for he’s polite, he seems clever. All it
needs now is for him to live in Paris in the rue du Temple!’ By which
words, M. de Charlus seemed simply to be looking for a fresh example by
which to support his theory; but in reality he was posing a question
whose intention was twofold, the principal one being to learn Bloch’s
address. ‘Indeed, Brichot pointed out, the rue du Temple used to be
called the rue de la Chevalerie-du-Temple. Apropos of which, will you
permit me an observation, Baron? said the university man. – What? What
is it? said M. de Charlus curtly, the remark having prevented him from
obtaining his information. – No, nothing, replied Brichot, abashed. It
was apropos of the etymology of Balbec that I was asked for. The rue du
Temple was once called the rue Barre-du-Bec, because the Abbey of Bec,
in Normandy, had its bar of justice there in Paris.’ M. de Charlus made
no reply and pretended not to have heard, which was one of the forms his
insolence took. ‘Where does your friend live in Paris? Since
three-quarters of the streets take their name from a church or an abbey,
there’s a good chance of the sacrilege continuing. You can’t stop Jews
living on the boulevard de la Madeleine, in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré or
the place Saint-Augustin. As long as they don’t carry perfidy to the
point of electing domicile in the place du Parvis-Notre-Dame, the quai
de l’Archevêché, the rue Chanoinesse or the rue de l’Ave Maria,
allowance must be made for their difficulties.’ We were unable to
satisfy M. de Charlus, Bloch’s current address not being known to us.
But I knew that his father’s offices were in the rue des
Blancs-Manteaux.⁸⁴ ‘Oh, the very height of perversity, exclaimed M. de
Charlus, seeming to derive a profound satisfaction from his own cry of
ironic indignation. Rue des Blancs-Manteaux, he repeated, laying weight
on each syllable and laughing. What sacrilege! To think that these
Blancs-Manteaux polluted by M. Bloch were those of the mendicant friars,
known as serfs of the Holy Virgin, that Saint Louis established there.⁸⁵
And the street has always belonged to the religious orders. The
profanation is all the more diabolical in that, no distance from the rue
des Blancs-Manteaux, there’s a street whose name escapes me but which is
entirely given over to the Jews; there are Hebrew characters on the
shops, factories making unleavened bread, Jewish butchers, it’s quite
simply the _Judengasse_ of Paris. M. de Rochegude calls that street the
Paris ghetto.⁸⁶ That’s where M. Bloch should have been living. Of
course, he went on, in a somewhat emphatic, lordly tone and, to make his
aesthetic pronouncements, lending to the face that he had drawn back, by
a reaction addressed to him in spite of himself by his heredity, the
look of one of Louis XIII’s old musketeers, I concern myself with all
that only from the point of view of art. Politics are not my thing and I
can’t condemn en bloc, even if Blochs there are, a nation that numbers
Spinoza amongst its illustrious sons. And I admire Rembrandt too much
not to know what beauty may be had from the frequentation of the
synagogue.⁸⁷ But then a ghetto is all the better the more homogeneous
and the more complete it is. You may be sure, in any case, so closely
bound up are the practical instinct and cupidity with sadism among that
race, that the proximity of the Hebraic street I am speaking of, and the
convenience of having Israelite butchers close to hand led your friend
to choose the rue des Blancs-Manteaux. How curious it is! It was there,
as it happens, that there lived a strange Jew who boiled the Host,⁸⁸
after which I believe they boiled him, which is stranger still since
that seems to signify that the body of a Jew can be of equal value to
the body of God. Perhaps something could be arranged with your friend so
that he takes us to see the church of the Blancs-Manteaux. To think that
it was there they laid the body of Louis d’Orléans after his
assassination by Jean the Fearless, who, alas, did not deliver us from
the Orléans.⁸⁹ Personally, I get on very well as it happens with my
cousin the duc de Chartres, but in the end they’re a race of usurpers,
who had Louis XVI assassinated, and Charles X and Henri V despoiled.⁹⁰
They’ve much to live up to, moreover, having for ancestors Monsieur, so
called no doubt because he was the most astonishing old woman, and the
Regent and all the rest. What a family!’ This speech, anti-Jewish or
pro-Hebrew – according to whether you fastened on the surface of the
words or the intentions they concealed – had been comically watered down
for me by a remark whispered to me by Morel which would have made M. de
Charlus despair. Morel, who had not failed to observe the impression
Bloch had been making, thanked me surreptitiously for having
‘despatched’ him, adding cynically: ‘He’d have liked to stay, all that’s
jealousy, he’d like to take my place. Typical of a yid! – We could have
profited from this prolonged stoppage to ask for a few ritual
explanations from your friend. Couldn’t you catch him up? M. de Charlus
asked me, with the anxiety of doubt. – No, it’s impossible, he went off
in a carriage and angry with me, moreover. – Thank you, thank you,
breathed Morel. – The reason’s absurd, you can always overtake a
carriage, there’s nothing to stop you taking a motor-car,’ replied M. de
Charlus, as a man accustomed to having everything submit to him. But,
observing my silence: ‘What is this more or less imaginary carriage?’ he
said, insolently, and with a last flicker of hope. – It’s an open
post-chaise which must already have got to La Commanderie.’ Faced by an
impossibility, M. de Charlus resigned himself and affected to joke. ‘I
can understand that they should have been put off by the superfluous
brougham. It would have been a new broom.’ Finally, we were advised that
the train was departing and Saint-Loup left us. But that was the one day
when, by getting into our compartment, he unwittingly caused me to
suffer, from the thought I entertained for an instant of leaving him
with Albertine in order to go with Bloch. On the other occasions, his
presence did not torment me. For of her own accord, Albertine, to spare
me any anxiety, took up a position, on some pretext or other, such that
she would have been unable, even involuntarily, to brush against Robert,
almost too far away even to have to offer him her hand; looking the
other way, she would begin, as soon as he was there, to talk ostensibly
and almost with affectation with one or other of the other travellers,
keeping up this game until Saint-Loup had gone. In this way, the visits
he made to us in Doncières, causing me neither pain nor even
embarrassment, did not form an exception to the others, all of which
were agreeable for bringing me in some sense the homage and the
invitation of this land. Already, from the end of the summer, on our
journey from Balbec to Douville, when I spotted the station of
Saint-Pierre-des-Ifs in the distance where, for a moment, in the
evenings, the crest of the cliffs sparkled pink like the snow on a
mountain in the setting sun, it no longer put me in mind (I do not say
of the sadness even that the sight of its sudden strange rearing-up had
produced in me on that first evening by giving me so strong a desire to
catch the train back to Paris instead of going on to Balbec) of the
spectacle which you could see from there in the mornings, so Elstir had
told me, in the hour before the sun came up, when all the colours of the
rainbow are refracted on the rocks, and where he had so many times woken
up the young boy who, one year, had served him as a model, to paint him,
stark naked, against the sand. The name of Saint-Pierre-des-Ifs merely
announced to me that there was about to appear a strange, witty,
bedizened fifty-year-old, with whom I would be able to discuss
Chateaubriand and Balzac. And now, in the mists of evening, behind the
Incarville cliffs that had so set me to dreaming in the old days, what I
could see, as if its ancient sandstone had grown transparent, was the
beautiful house of an uncle of M. de Cambremer’s, where I knew they
would always be glad to take me in if I did not want to dine at La
Raspelière or return to Balbec. Thus it was not simply the place-names
of the region which had lost their original mystery, but the places
themselves. The names, already half voided of a mystery that etymology
had replaced by reason, had descended one step further still. On our
return journeys to Hermonville, Saint-Vast, Arembouville, just as the
train was stopping, we would catch sight of shadows that we did not at
first recognize and which Brichot, who could not see a thing, might
perhaps have mistaken in the darkness for the phantoms of Herimund,
Wiscar and Herimbald. But they approached the carriage. It was merely M.
de Cambremer, his breach with the Verdurins now complete, seeing guests
off, and who, on behalf of his wife and his mother, came to ask me
whether I would not like him to ‘kidnap’ me, to keep me for a few days
at Féterne, whither there would be following one another, an excellent
lady musician who would sing me the whole of Gluck, and a chess-player
of repute with whom I would have excellent games, which would not get in
the way of the fishing or yachting parties in the bay, or even the
Verdurin dinners, for which the Marquis gave his word of honour that he
would ‘lend’ me, having me driven there and fetched again so as to make
it easier, as well as safer. ‘But I can’t imagine it’s good for you to
go that high up. I know my sister wouldn’t be able to stand it. She’d
come back in such a state! She’s not as it happens all that good at
present… Really, you’ve had that bad an attack! Tomorrow you won’t be
able to stand up!’ And he doubled up, not out of unkindness, but for the
same reason that he could not not laugh when he saw a lame man go
sprawling in the street, or talked with a deaf person. ‘And before that?
What, you hadn’t had one for a fortnight? D’you know, that’s very fine!
You really ought to come and install yourself at Féterne, you could
discuss your attacks with my sister.’ At Incarville, it was the Marquis
de Montpeyroux who, not having been able to go to Féterne, for he had
been away hunting, had come ‘to the train’ in boots and a hat decorated
with a pheasant feather, to shake the hand of some relations and of
myself at the same time, announcing, for the day of the week that would
not inconvenience me, the visit of his son, whom he thanked me for
entertaining and would be very happy if I got him to do some reading; or
else M. de Crécy, come there, so he said, smoking his pipe, to settle
his digestion, who accepted one or even several cigars, and said to me:
‘Well, you haven’t told me what day our next get-together à la Lucullus
is to be? We’ve nothing to say to one another? Permit me to remind you
that we left unfinished the question of the two families of
Montgommerys. We have to settle that. I’m counting on you.’ Others had
come simply to buy their newspapers. Many also exchanged a few words
with us, whom I have always suspected of finding themselves on the
platform, at the station nearest to their small château, only because
they had nothing better to do except meet for a moment with people of
their acquaintance. These stops the little train made were, all in all,
as much a setting for social life as any other. It seemed aware itself
of the role that had devolved on it, and had developed a certain human
friendliness: patient and docile in character, it waited for as long as
was required for the stragglers, and even once it had left would stop to
pick up those who signalled to it; they would then run after it,
puffing, in which they resembled the train itself, with the difference
that they caught it up going at full speed, whereas it had resorted to a
sensible dilatoriness. Thus Hermonville, Arembouville, Incarville no
longer even evoked for me the savage magnificence of the Norman
conquest, not content with having entirely divested themselves of the
unaccountable sadness in which, once upon a time, I had seen them bathed
in the evening damp. Doncières! Even after I had come to know it and had
woken up from my dream, how long there had remained in that name for me
agreeably icy streets, lighted shop-windows and succulent poultry!
Doncières! Now it was nothing more than the station at which Morel got
in; Egleville (_Aquilaevilla_) that where the Princesse Sherbatoff was
generally waiting for us; Maineville, the station where Albertine would
alight on fine evenings, when, not feeling too tired, she was anxious to
spend a moment or two longer with me, having scarcely any further to
walk, up a steep path, than if she had alighted at Parville (_Paterni
villa_). Not only did I no longer experience the anxious fear of
isolation that had gripped me that first evening, but I no longer had to
fear that it might reawaken, nor feeling homesick, nor finding myself
alone in this land productive not only of chestnut trees and tamarisks,
but of friendships, which, all along the journey, formed a long chain,
broken, like that of the blue-coloured hills, hidden now and again in
the anfractuosity of the rocks or behind the lime-trees of the avenue,
but at each relay delegating an amiable gentleman who came, with a
cordial shake of the hand, to interrupt my journey, to prevent my
becoming conscious of its length, if need be to offer to continue it
with me. Another one would be at the next station, so that the little
tram’s whistle made us abandon one friend only so as to enable us to
meet again with others. Between the more scattered châteaux and the
train that skirted them almost at a fast walking pace, the distance was
so short that at the moment when, on the platform, in front of the
waiting-room, their owners hailed us, we might almost have thought that
that they were doing so from their own doorsteps or from their bedroom
window, as if the little departmental railway-line were nothing more
than a provincial street and the isolated manor house an urban _hôtel_;
and even at the rare stations where I did not hear anyone’s ‘good
evening’, the silence had a calming and nutritious fullness, because I
knew it to be formed of the sleep of friends who had retired early in
the nearby manor, where my arrival would have been greeted with delight
had I had to awaken them in order to ask for some favour of hospitality.
Except that habit so takes up our time that, at the end of a few months,
we no longer have a free moment in a town where, when we arrived, the
day offered us the free disposal of its twelve hours; had by any chance
one of these become vacant, I would no longer have thought of using it
in order to visit some church or other for the sake of which I had once
come to Balbec, nor even to compare a beauty-spot painted by Elstir with
the sketch of it I had seen in his house, but to go and have one more
game of chess with M. Féré. Indeed, such was the degrading influence,
and also the charm, of the country around Balbec, that it had become
truly familiar ground for me; if their territorial distribution, their
being sown along the full extent of the coast, in diverse crops,
necessarily lent to the visits I made to these various friends the form
of a journey, they also now confined the attractions of that journey to
the social ones, of a succession of visits. The same place-names, so
disturbing for me in the old days that merely leafing through the
chapter for the department of the Manche in the _Annuaire des châteaux_
produced as much emotion in me as the railway time-table, had become so
familiar that I might have consulted that same time-table, on the
Balbec–Douville via Doncières page, with the same contented peace of
mind as a dictionary of addresses. In this too social valley, to the
sides of which I sensed there clung, whether visible or not, a numerous
company of friends, the poetic cry of evening was no longer that of the
owl or the frog, but the ‘How goes it?’ of M. de Criquetot, or the
‘Kaire’ of Brichot. The atmosphere no longer aroused anxieties and,
laden with purely human effluvia, was breathable without difficulty, too
soothing even. The benefit that I derived from it, at least, was no
longer to see things except from the practical point of view. Marriage
with Albertine struck me as foolishness.


CHAPTER 4


_Sudden reversion to Albertine. – Desolation at break of day. – I leave
at once for Paris with Albertine._

I was only awaiting an opportunity for the final rupture. And one
evening, as Mama was leaving the next day for Combray, where she was
going to attend a sister of her mother’s in her last illness, leaving me
behind so that I might benefit, as Grandmother would have wanted, from
the sea air, I announced to her that I had decided irrevocably not to
marry Albertine and would shortly stop from seeing her. I was pleased to
have been able, by these words, to give my mother satisfaction on the
eve of her departure. She made no secret of the fact that it was indeed
for her a very keen satisfaction. I needed also to have things out with
Albertine. As I was returning with her from La Raspelière, the faithful
having alighted, some at Saint-Mars-le-Vêtu, others at
Saint-Pierre-des-Ifs, still others at Doncières, feeling especially
happy and detached from her, I had made up my mind, now that there were
only the two of us in the compartment, finally to broach the
conversation. The truth in any case was that that one of the Balbec
girls whom I loved, although she was then away, along with her friends,
but would be returning (I enjoyed being with all of them, for each of
them had for me, as on the first day, something of the essence of the
others, was as if from a race apart), was Andrée. Since she would be
arriving back in Balbec in a few days’ time, she would certainly come
and see me straight away, and then, in order to remain free, and not to
marry her if I did not want to, so as to be able to go to Venice, but
yet to have her all to myself in the meantime, the means I would adopt
would be not to appear to be going to her but, as soon as she arrived,
when we were talking together, I would say: ‘What a pity I didn’t see
you a few weeks earlier! I’d have loved you; now my heart is taken. But
that doesn’t matter, we’ll see each other often, for I’m unhappy in my
other love and you will help to console me.’ I smiled inwardly on
imagining this conversation, for in this way I would be giving Andrée
the illusion that I did not really love her; thus she would not grow
tired of me and I would take joyful and consoling advantage of her
affection. But all this only made it the more necessary finally to talk
seriously to Albertine, so as not to act unscrupulously, and since I was
resolved to devote myself to her friend, she, Albertine, needed
certainly to know that I did not love her. She needed to be told right
away, since Andrée might arrive any day. But as we were nearing
Parville, I felt that we would not have time that evening and that it
would be better to put off until the following day what had now been
irrevocably decided on. I contented myself therefore with talking to her
about the dinner we had been to at the Verdurins’. As she was putting
her coat back on, the train having just left Incarville, the last
station before Parville, she said: ‘Tomorrow then, re-Verdurin, you
won’t forget that it’s you who are coming to fetch me.’ I could not help
answering, somewhat curtly: ‘Yes, unless I “default”, because I’m
beginning to find this life really stupid. At all events, if we go
there, so that my time at La Raspelière shouldn’t be time totally
wasted, I shall have to think of asking Mme Verdurin something that
could interest me greatly, be a subject for study, and give me pleasure,
because I’m really getting very little this year in Balbec. – That’s not
being very nice, but I won’t hold it against you, because I can tell
you’re nervous. What is this pleasure? – That Mme Verdurin should get
them to play me things by a musician whose works she knows very well. I,
too, know one of them, but it seems there are others and I’d need to
find out if it’s been published, if it differs from the early ones. –
What musician? – If I tell you that his name’s Vinteuil, my sweet one,
are you any the wiser?’ We may have turned over in our minds every
possible idea without the truth ever entering, and it is from outside,
when we least expect it, that it delivers its fearsome sting and wounds
us for ever. ‘You can’t know how much you amuse me, replied Albertine,
standing up, for the train was about to stop. Not only does it mean much
more to me than you think, but even without Mme Verdurin I can get you
all the information you want. You remember my speaking to you about a
girl-friend, older than me, who was like both a mother and sister to me,
whom I spent my best years with in Trieste and who, moreover, I’m due to
meet in Cherbourg in a few weeks’ time, from where we’ll be travelling
together (it’s a little weird, but you know how I love the sea), well,
this friend (oh, not at all the type of woman you might suppose!), and
isn’t this extraordinary, is in actual fact the best friend of this
Vinteuil’s daughter, and I know Vinteuil’s daughter almost as well. I
only ever call them my two big sisters. I’m not unhappy at showing you
that your little Albertine can be useful to you in these musical
matters, where you say, rightly as it happens, that I don’t understand a
thing.’ At these words, uttered as we were entering the station in
Parville, so far from Combray and from Montjouvain, so long after
Vinteuil’s death, a picture came to life in my heart, a picture held in
reserve during so many years that, even had I been able to guess, when
long ago storing it away, that it had the power to do harm, I would have
supposed that in the course of time it had lost it entirely; preserved
alive deep inside me – like Orestes, whose death the gods had prevented
so that on the day appointed he might return to his homeland to punish
the murder of Agamemnon – as my torment, as my punishment perhaps, who
knows, for having allowed my grandmother to die; suddenly rising up out
of the depths of that darkness where it had seemed to lie forever
entombed and striking like an Avenger, in order to inaugurate for me a
new life, terrible and deserved, perhaps also to explode before my eyes
the fateful consequences to which wicked actions give rise indefinitely,
not only for those who have committed them but for those who were no
more than, who thought they were merely, onlookers at a curious and
diverting spectacle, like me, alas, on that far-off day’s end in
Montjouvain, hidden behind a bush, where (as when I had listened
complaisantly to the account of Swann’s amours) I had perilously allowed
to broaden out within me the fateful path of Knowledge, destined to
become so sorrowful. And at that same moment, of my greatest sorrow, I
had a feeling, proud almost, almost joyful, that of a man caused to leap
so far upwards by the shock that he has received that he has attained a
point to which no effort could have raised him. Albertine the friend of
Mlle Vinteuil and of her friend, a practising and professional Sapphist,
this, compared with what I had imagined at my most suspecting, was what,
in comparison with the little acoustic device at the 1889 Exhibition,
which you hardly hoped might reach from one end of the house to the
other, the telephone now is, soaring over streets, towns, fields and
seas, linking regions. This was a terrible _terra incognita_ on which I
had just set foot, a new phase of unsuspected suffering that was
opening. And yet the deluge of reality that submerges us, enormous
though it may be compared with our timid and negligible suppositions,
had been anticipated by them. It was no doubt something like what I had
just learned, something like the friendship between Albertine and Mlle
Vinteuil, something that my mind would have been incapable of inventing,
but which I had obscurely apprehended when I was so concerned at seeing
Albertine next to Andrée. It is often only for want of the creative
spirit that we do not go far enough in suffering. And the most terrible
reality brings us, at the same time as suffering, the joy of a beautiful
discovery, for all that it does is to lend a new and explicit form to
what we had long been turning over in our minds without suspecting it.
The train had stopped in Parville, and as we were the only passengers to
be found on it, it was in a voice made limp by his sense of the futility
of the task, by the same habit that yet made him fulfil it, and inspired
him at once with indolence and punctiliousness, and even more out of the
longing for sleep, that the porter shouted: ‘Parville!’ Albertine,
standing facing me and seeing that she had reached her destination, took
a few steps from the back of the carriage where we were and opened the
door. But the movement that she thus performed in order to alight tore
unbearably at my heart as if, contrary to the position that Albertine’s
body, independently of my own, seemed to be occupying a short step away,
this separation in space, which a truthful draughtsman would have been
obliged to represent between us, was only an appearance, and as if
whoever might have wanted, in accordance with the true reality, to
re-draw things would have now had to place Albertine, not at some little
distance from me, but inside me. Her moving away caused me such pain
that, catching her up, I pulled her despairingly by the arm. ‘Would it
be physically impossible, I asked her, for you to come and spend the
night in Balbec? – Physically, no. But I can’t keep awake. – You’d be
doing me an immense favour… – All right then, though I don’t understand;
why didn’t you say sooner? Anyway, I’ll stay.’ My mother was asleep
when, after getting them to give Albertine a room on another floor, I
returned to my own room. I sat down near the window, stifling my sobs so
that my mother, who was separated from me only by a thin partition,
might not hear me. I had not even thought to close the shutters, for at
one moment, raising my eyes, I saw, facing me, in the sky, that same
faint glow of a dull red that was to be seen in the restaurant at
Rivebelle in a study Elstir had made of a sunset. I recalled the
exaltation that, when I had caught sight of it from the train on the day
of my arrival in Balbec, this same image of a dusk that was the prelude
not to the night, but to a new day, had given me. But no day now would
ever again be new for me, would ever again awaken the longing for an
unknown happiness, but would merely prolong my sufferings, until I would
no longer have the strength to withstand them. The truth of what Cottard
had said to me in the casino in Parville¹ was no longer in any doubt.
What I had dreaded, had long vaguely suspected of Albertine, what my
instinct had isolated from her whole being, but what my arguments,
guided by my desire, had slowly led me to deny, was true! Behind
Albertine I no longer saw the blue mountains of the sea, but the room in
Montjouvain where she was falling into the arms of Mlle Vinteuil, with
that laugh in which she made you hear as it were the unknown sound of
her sexual pleasure. For, pretty as Albertine was, how could Mlle
Vinteuil, with her proclivities, not have asked her to satisfy them? And
the proof that Albertine had not been shocked by this, but had
consented, was that they had not quarrelled, but that their intimacy had
not ceased to grow. And that graceful movement of Albertine’s, resting
her chin on Rosemonde’s shoulder, gazing at her with a smile, and
planting a kiss on her neck, that movement which had reminded me of Mlle
Vinteuil, and in the interpretation of which I had yet hesitated to
admit that the same line traced by a gesture had necessarily to result
from the same penchant, who knows whether Albertine had not simply
learned it from Mlle Vinteuil? The colourless sky was slowly catching
fire. I, who up until now had never woken up without smiling at the
humblest things, at the bowl of _café au lait_, the sound of the rain,
the thunder of the wind, I felt that the day which would be breaking in
a moment, and all the days that came after, would never again bring me
the hope of an unknown happiness, but a prolonging of my martyrdom. I
still held to life; I knew that I could now expect from it only what was
cruel. I ran to the lift, despite the unseemly hour, to ring for the
‘lift’ who filled the duties of night watchman, and I asked him to go to
Albertine’s room, to tell her I had something important to convey to
her, if she were able to receive me. ‘Mademoiselle would rather she came
to you, was the reply. She’ll be here in a moment.’ And soon, indeed,
Albertine came in in a dressing-gown. ‘Albertine,’ I said very softly,
and warning her not to raise her voice so as not to wake my mother, from
whom we were separated only by the same partition, the thinness of
which, inopportune today, and obliging us to whisper, had once
resembled, when my grandmother’s intentions had been so clearly depicted
on it, a sort of musical diaphaneity, ‘I’m ashamed to have disturbed
you. Here. So that you’ll understand, I must tell you something you
don’t know. When I came here, I left a woman whom I was due to marry,
who was ready to give up everything for my sake. She was due to leave on
a journey this morning and for the past week, every day, I’ve been
wondering whether I’d have the courage not to telegraph her that I was
returning. I had the courage, but I was so wretched that I thought I’d
kill myself. That’s why I asked you last night if you couldn’t come and
sleep in Balbec. If I was going to die, I’d have liked to say goodbye to
you.’ And I gave free rein to the tears that my fiction had made
natural. ‘My poor lamb, had I known, I’d have spent the night with you,’
exclaimed Albertine, into whose head the idea that I would perhaps marry
this woman, and that her own opportunity of making a ‘good marriage’ had
vanished, never even entered, so sincerely moved was she by an
unhappiness whose source I could keep from her, but not its reality and
its strength. ‘Anyway, she said, yesterday, during the whole journey
from La Raspelière, I could certainly tell you were on edge and unhappy,
I was afraid of something.’ In actual fact, my unhappiness had begun
only at Parville, and my edginess, very different but which Albertine
happily had confused with it, came from the tedium of living a few more
days with her. She went on: ‘I shan’t leave you again, I’m going to stay
here all the time.’ She was in fact offering me – and she alone could
offer it – the one remedy against the poison that was burning me,
homogeneous with it, moreover; the one sweet, the other cruel, both
alike had derived from Albertine. At that moment, Albertine – my
sickness – relenting from causing me to suffer, left me – she, Albertine
the remedy – as susceptible as a convalescent. But I reflected that she
would soon be leaving Balbec for Cherbourg and thence for Trieste. Her
habits of old were going to be revived. What I wanted above all else,
was to prevent Albertine from catching the boat, to try and take her to
Paris. Admittedly, from Paris she could, if she wanted, more easily than
from Balbec, go to Trieste, but in Paris we would see; perhaps I would
be able to ask Mme de Guermantes to influence Mlle Vinteuil’s friend
indirectly so that she would not remain in Trieste, to get her to accept
a position elsewhere, perhaps with the Prince de***, whom I had met at
Mme de Villeparisis’s and even at Mme de Guermantes’s. And he, even if
Albertine wanted to go there in order to meet her friend, might,
forewarned by Mme de Guermantes, prevent them from coming together.
True, I might have told myself that in Paris, if Albertine had these
proclivities, she would find a great many other people with whom to
gratify them. But each impulse of jealousy is particular and bears the
stamp of the individual – on this occasion, Mlle Vinteuil’s friend – who
has excited it. It was Mlle Vinteuil’s friend who remained my chief
preoccupation. The mysterious passion with which I had once thought
about Austria because it was the country from which Albertine had come
(her uncle had been a counsellor in the embassy there), and I was able
to study its geographical singularity, the race that inhabited it, its
monuments, its landscapes, as if in an atlas, in a collection of views,
in Albertine’s smile and her mannerisms, I experienced that passion
again but, its signs now inverted, in the domain of horror. Yes, it was
from there that Albertine had come. It was there that, in every house,
she would be sure to find again, either Mlle Vinteuil’s friend, or else
others. Childhood habits would revive, they would be gathering in three
months’ time for Christmas, then the First of January, dates that were
already sad for me in themselves, because of the unconscious memory of
the unhappiness I had experienced when, in the old days, they had
separated me, all through the New Year holiday, from Gilberte. After the
long dinners, after the _réveillons_,² when everyone would be joyful and
animated, Albertine would be adopting, with her friends from there, the
same attitudes that I had seen her take up with Andrée, and whereas
Albertine’s friendship with her was innocent, who knows, perhaps the
ones that had brought Mlle Vinteuil, pursued by her friend, close before
me at Montjouvain. To Mlle Vinteuil, while her friend was tickling her
before pouncing on her, I now lent the inflamed features of Albertine,
of Albertine whom I could hear, as she ran off, then gave herself up,
letting out that strange, deep laugh. What, compared with the pain I was
experiencing, was the jealousy I had been able to feel on the day when
Saint-Loup had met Albertine with me in Doncières, and when she had led
him on? Or that which I had felt when thinking back to the unknown
initiator to whom I may have owed the first kisses she had given me in
Paris, on the day when I was awaiting Mlle de Stermaria’s letter? That
other jealousy, provoked by Saint-Loup, or by some young man or other,
was nothing. I might in that case have had to fear at most a rival over
whom I could have tried to prevail. But this time the rival was not of
my own kind, their weapons were different, I could not give battle on
the same terrain, or afford Albertine the same pleasures, or even
conceive of them accurately. At many moments in our lives, we would
barter the whole of the future against an in itself insignificant power.
In the old days, I would have renounced all life’s advantages to get to
know Mme Blatin, because she was a friend of Mme Swann’s. Today, in
order that Albertine should not go to Trieste, I would have endured all
manner of suffering and, were that insufficient, would have inflicted it
on her, would have isolated her, locked her away, would have taken away
the little money she had so that penury might prevent her physically
from making the journey. As. in the old days, when I had wanted to go to
Balbec, what drove me to leave was the longing for a Persian church, or
for a storm at dawn, what now rent my heart when I thought that
Albertine would perhaps be going to Trieste, was that she would spend
Christmas night there with Mlle Vinteuil’s friend; for the imagination,
when it changes its nature and is transformed into sensibility, does not
thereby have at its disposal a greater number of simultaneous images.
Had I been told that she was not at that moment in Cherbourg, nor in
Trieste, that she could not meet Albertine, how I would have wept, for
joy and in relief! How my life and its future would have changed! Yet I
knew very well that this localization of my jealousy was arbitrary, that
if Albertine had these tastes she could gratify them with others.
Perhaps even these same girls, if they could have met her elsewhere,
would not have tortured my heart so. It was from Trieste, from that
unknown world where I felt that Albertine had found enjoyment, where her
memories were, her friendships, her childhood loves, that there was
exhaled this hostile, inexplicable atmosphere, like that which used to
rise up into my room of old in Combray, from the dining-room, where I
could hear, laughing and talking with strangers, amidst the sound of
forks, Mama, who would not be coming up to say goodnight; like that
which, for Swann, had filled the houses where Odette had gone to a
soirée in search of unimaginable delights. It was no longer as of some
delectable land where the people are pensive, the sunsets golden, the
carillons sad, that I now thought of Trieste, but as an accursed city
that I would have liked instantly to have burned down and erased from
the real world. That town had become lodged in my heart like a permanent
arrowhead. To let Albertine leave soon for Cherbourg and Trieste filled
me with horror; or even to remain in Balbec. For now that the revelation
of my loved one’s intimacy with Mlle Vinteuil had made me all but
certain, I fancied that at every moment when Albertine was not with me
(and there were whole days when, on account of her aunt, I could not see
her), she was at the mercy of Bloch’s cousins, and perhaps of others.
The thought that this very evening she might be meeting Bloch’s cousins
drove me mad. And so, after she had told me that she would not leave me
for the next few days, I replied: ‘But the fact is I’d like to leave for
Paris. Won’t you leave with me? And wouldn’t you like to come and live
with us for a bit in Paris?’ I had at all costs to prevent her being on
her own, at least for a few days, to keep her beside me so as to be sure
that she could not meet Mlle Vinteuil’s friend. It would in reality mean
her staying alone with me, for my mother, taking advantage of a tour of
inspection that my father would be making, had prescribed it as her duty
to obey my grandmother’s wish, who had wanted her to go for a few days
to Combray to be with one of her sisters. Mama did not like her aunt
because she had not been for Grandmother, so affectionate towards her,
the sister that she should have been. Thus, once grown up, do children
remember with resentment those who have treated them badly. But Mama
having become like my grandmother, herself incapable of resentment, her
mother’s life was for her like a pure and innocent childhood she would
draw on for those memories whose sweetness or bitterness governed her
actions towards this person or that. My aunt might have supplied Mama
with certain invaluable details, but now it would be hard for her to
obtain them, her aunt had fallen seriously ill (it was said with
cancer), and she reproached herself for not having gone sooner, so as to
keep my father company, and saw this simply as one more reason to do as
her mother would have done; and just as she went on my grandmother’s
father’s anniversary, who had been such a bad father, to take to his
grave the flowers that my grandmother had been in the habit of taking,
so, to the side of the grave that was about to open, my mother wanted to
bring the consoling conversations that my aunt had not come to offer my
grandmother. While she was in Combray, my mother would be taken up with
certain building work that my grandmother had always wanted, but only if
it was carried out under her daughter’s supervision. Thus it had not yet
been begun, Mama not wanting, by leaving Paris before my father, to make
him feel too much the weight of a loss in which he shared, but which
could not afflict him as much as it did her. ‘Oh, it wouldn’t be
possible at this moment, replied Albertine. Anyway, why do you need to
go back to Paris so soon, when the lady in question has gone? – Because
I shall be calmer in a place where I knew her, rather than in Balbec,
which she has never seen and which I’ve come to abominate.’ Did
Albertine later come to realize that this other woman did not exist, and
that if, on that particular night, I had truly wanted to die, it was
because she had thoughtlessly revealed to me that she was friendly with
the friend of Mlle Vinteuil? It is possible. There are times when it
strikes me as probable. At all events, on the morning in question, she
believed in the woman’s existence. ‘But you should marry this lady, _mon
petit_, she said, you’d be happy and she would surely be happy also.’ I
answered that the thought that I might make this woman happy had indeed
all but decided me; recently, when I had come into a large inheritance
that would enable me to give my wife every pleasure and luxury, I had
been on the verge of accepting the sacrifice of her whom I loved.
Intoxicated by the gratitude inspired in me by Albertine’s kindness, so
soon after the atrocious suffering she had caused me, just as we would
gladly promise the café waiter a fortune who is pouring us a sixth glass
of brandy, I told her that my wife would have a motor-car and a yacht;
that, from this point of view, since Albertine was so fond of motoring
and of yachting, it was unfortunate that it was not her whom I loved;
that I would have been the perfect husband for her, but that we would
see, we would perhaps find it agreeable to see one another. In spite of
everything, just as, in a state of drunkenness, we refrain from
accosting passers-by for fear of blows, I refrained from the imprudence
I would have committed in the days of Gilberte, of telling her that it
was her, Albertine, that I loved. ‘You see, I all but married her. But I
didn’t dare do it, however, I wouldn’t have wanted to make a young woman
live with someone so sickly and so tiresome. – But you’re crazy,
everyone would like to live with you, look how everyone seeks you out.
You’re all they ever talk about at Mme Verdurin’s, and in the wider
world, too, so I’m told. So she wasn’t being nice to you, this lady, was
she, by having the effect of making you doubt yourself? I can tell what
she is, she’s spiteful and I hate her, oh, if it’d been me…! – No, no,
she’s very kind, too kind. As for the Verdurins and all the rest, I
don’t give a fig. Apart from the woman that I love and whom I’ve anyway
given up, I care only for my little Albertine, she’s the only one, by
seeing a lot of me – in the early days at least, I added, so as not to
alarm her and to be able to ask a lot of her during these days – who can
console me a little.’ I made only a vague allusion to the possibility of
marriage, while saying that it was unrealizable because our characters
would not be in harmony. In spite of myself, still pursued in my
jealousy by the memory of Saint-Loup’s relations with ‘Rachel when of
the Lord’ and of those of Swann with Odette, I was too given to
believing that the moment I was in love, I could not be loved and that
self-interest alone could attach a woman to me. It was no doubt foolish
to judge Albertine in terms of Odette and Rachel. But it was not her, it
was me; it was the sentiments I might inspire which my jealousy caused
me to underestimate. And of this – perhaps erroneous – judgment were no
doubt born many of the misfortunes that would befall us. ‘You refuse my
invitation for Paris, then? – My aunt wouldn’t want me to leave at
present. Anyway, even if I can later on, wouldn’t it look funny, my
coming to stay with you like that? In Paris they’d know very well I’m
not your cousin. – Well, we’ll say we’re more or less engaged. What does
it matter, since you know it isn’t true?’ Albertine’s neck, the whole of
which was protruding from her nightdress, was powerful, golden,
coarse-grained. I kissed it as innocently as if I had been kissing my
mother, to still a childish unhappiness that I thought then I would
never be able to tear out from my heart. Albertine left me to go and get
dressed. Her devotion was already weakening, in any case; a little
earlier, she had said she would not leave me for a second. (And I felt
indeed that her resolution would not last because I was afraid that, if
we stayed in Balbec, she might that same evening, if it were not for me,
meet Bloch’s cousins.) Yet now she had just told me she wanted to go
over to Maineville and would come back and see me during the afternoon.
She had not been home the previous evening, there might be letters for
her, moreover her aunt might be worried. I had replied: ‘If that’s the
only reason, we can send the “lift” to tell your aunt you’re here and
fetch your letters.’ And, wanting to show she was kind, though annoyed
at being subjugated, she had wrinkled her brow and then, suddenly, very
kindly, said ‘That’s right’, and had sent the ‘lift’. Albertine had left
me only for a moment before the ‘lift’ came and tapped on the door. I
had not expected him, while I was talking with Albertine, to have had
the time to go to Maineville and then return. He came to tell me that
Albertine had written a note to her aunt and that she could, if I
wanted, come to Paris that same day. She had on the other hand been
wrong to give him the message orally, for already, despite the earliness
of the hour, the manager had heard and came, distraught, to ask me if I
was unhappy about something, if I really was leaving, if I could not
wait at least for a few days, the wind today being somewhat fearful (to
be feared). I refused to explain that I wanted at all costs for
Albertine no longer to be in Balbec at the hour when Bloch’s cousins
took their walk, especially with Andrée, who alone might have able to
shield her, not being there, and that Balbec was like those places in
which an invalid, who can no longer breathe there, has decided, even
though he may die along the way, not to spend another night. For the
rest, I was going to have to battle against entreaties of the same kind,
in the hotel first of all, where Marie Gineste and Céleste Albaret were
red-eyed. (Marie, moreover, gave vent to the urgent sobbing of a
mountain torrent; the more lethargic Céleste urged her to calm; but
Marie having murmured the only lines of poetry that she knew, ‘_Ici-bas
tous les lilas meurent_’, Céleste could not contain herself and a sheet
of tears spilled across her lilac-coloured face; I imagine, on the other
hand, that they had forgotten me by that same evening.) Then, on the
little branch-line train, despite all my precautions against being seen,
I encountered M. de Cambremer, who, at the sight of my trunks, turned
pale, for he had been counting on me for two days’ hence; he exasperated
me by trying to persuade me that my breathless attacks depended on the
change in the weather and that October would be ideal for them, and he
asked me whether, at all events, I could not ‘put off my departure for a
week’, an expression whose stupidity enraged me only perhaps because
what he was proposing made me feel sick. And while he was speaking to me
in the carriage, I was afraid at each station of seeing there appear,
more terrible than Herimbald or Guiscard, M. de Crécy begging for an
invitation, or more dreadful still, Mme Verdurin, insisting on inviting
me. But that would happen only in a few hours’ time. I had not yet
reached that point. I had to confront only the despairing lamentations
of the manager. I showed him the door, because I was afraid that, though
he was whispering, he would wake Mama. I remained alone in the room,
that same room with the too-high ceiling where I had been so unhappy on
my first arrival, where I had had such tender thoughts of Mlle de
Stermaria, had watched out for Albertine and her friends to go past like
migrating birds that had paused on the beach, where I had possessed her
with such indifference when I had sent the ‘lift’ to fetch her, where I
had experienced my grandmother’s goodness, then learned that she was
dead; these shutters, at the foot of which the morning light was
falling, I had opened them that first time to see the first foothills of
the sea (the shutters that Albertine had made me close so that we should
not be seen kissing). I became more clearly aware of my own
transformations by contrasting them with the self-identity of things.
Yet we become accustomed to these as we do to people and when, suddenly,
we recall the different meaning that they carried, and then, once they
had lost all meaning, the events, very different from those of today,
for which they had been the setting, the diversity of the actions
performed beneath the same ceiling, between the same glass-fronted
bookcases, the change in our hearts and in our lives which that
diversity implies seems further enhanced by the immutable permanence of
the décor, reinforced by the unity of place.

I two or three times had the idea, momentarily, that the world in which
this room and these book-cases were, and in which Albertine counted for
so little, was perhaps an intellectual world, which was the sole
reality, and my unhappiness something like that which we get from
reading a novel, and which a madman alone could make into a lasting and
permanent unhappiness, extending into his life; that it would take only
a slight effort of will perhaps to attain to that real world, to return
into it by passing beyond my grief, as though bursting through a paper
hoop, and no more to care about what Albertine had done than we care
about the actions of the imaginary heroine of a novel after we have
finished reading it. Moreover, the mistresses whom I have loved the most
have never coincided with my love for them. This love was true, since I
subordinated everything else to seeing them, to keeping them for myself
alone, since I would sob if, one evening, I had waited for them. But
they had the peculiar quality of arousing that love, of carrying it to a
paroxysm, rather than of being the image of it. When I saw them, when I
listened to them, I found nothing in them that might resemble my love or
be able to explain it. Yet my one joy was to see them, my one anxiety to
wait for them. It was as if a virtue having no connection with them had
been adjoined to them incidentally by nature, and that this virtue, this
electricity-like power, had the effect on me of exciting my love, that
is to say of directing all my actions and causing all my sufferings. But
from this, the beauty, or the intelligence, or the goodness of these
women were wholly distinct. As though by an electric current that moves
you, I have been shaken by my love affairs, I have lived them, I have
felt them; never have I succeeded in seeing them or thinking them. I
incline even to think that in these affairs (I leave aside the physical
pleasure which is of course their habitual accompaniment, but is not
enough to constitute them), beneath the outward appearance of the woman,
it is to these invisible forces by which she is incidentally accompanied
that we address ourselves, as if to obscure divinities. It is they whose
good-will is necessary to us, contact with which we seek without finding
any positive pleasure in it. During our assignations, the woman puts us
in touch with these goddesses, and hardly anything more. We have, as
offerings, promised jewels and voyages, and uttered forms of words which
signify that we adore her, and contrary forms of words which signify our
indifference. We have expended all our influence on obtaining a fresh
assignation, but one to be accorded without annoyance. But is it for the
woman herself, were she not completed by these occult forces, that we
would go to so much trouble, when, once she has gone, we would be unable
to say how she was dressed, and we realize that we have not even looked
at her?

What a deceitful sense sight is! A human body, even when loved, as was
that of Albertine, seems, from a few metres, a few centimetres away,
distant from us. And the soul that belongs to it likewise. Except that,
should something come violently to alter the position of that soul in
relation to us, to show us that it loves other human beings and not
ourselves, then, by the beating of our dislocated hearts, we feel that
the cherished creature was not a few feet away, but inside us. Inside
us, in more or less superficial regions. But the words ‘That friend is
Mlle Vinteuil’ had been the ‘Open sesame’ that I would have been
incapable of finding for myself, which had caused Albertine to penetrate
deep into my lacerated heart. And I might have searched for a hundred
years without knowing how the door might be reopened that had closed on
her.

I had ceased hearing these words momentarily while Albertine was with me
a little earlier. In kissing her as I had used to kiss my mother in
Combray to calm my anguish, I almost believed in Albertine’s innocence
or at least did not think in any coherent way of the discovery I had
made of her vice. But now that I was alone, the words rang out once more
like those noises inside the ear that we hear as soon as someone has
stopped talking to us. Her vice was now no longer in any doubt. The
light of the sun, which was about to come up, by modifying the objects
around me, made me once again, as if shifting my position for a moment
in relation to it, aware, even more cruelly, of my pain. Never had I
seen so beautiful and so sorrowful a morning. Reflecting on all the
indifferent landscapes that were about to be illuminated, and which,
only yesterday, would have filled me only with the desire to visit them,
I could not contain a sob, when, in a mechanically executed gesture of
oblation, seeming to symbolize for me the bloody sacrifice that I was
about to have to make of all joy, each morning, until the end of my
life, a renewal, solemnly celebrated at each dawning of my daily
unhappiness and of the blood from my wound, the golden egg of the sun,
as if propelled by the break in equilibrium produced at the moment of
coagulation by a change of density, barbed with flames as in paintings,
burst in one bound through the curtain behind which I had sensed it
quivering for the past few moments, ready to enter on to the stage and
to spring upwards, and whose mysterious, congealed purple it erased
beneath floods of light. I could hear myself crying. But at that moment,
against all expectation, the door opened, and, my heart pounding, I
seemed to see my grandmother before me, as in one of those apparitions
that I had already had, but only in my sleep. Was all this only a dream,
then? Alas, I was wide awake. ‘You think I look like your poor
grandmother,’ said Mama – for it was her – gently, as if to calm my
fright, admitting, however, to the resemblance, with a lovely smile of
modest pride in which coquettishness had never had any part. Her
disordered hair, in which the grey strands had not been hidden but were
wound about her anxious eyes and her ageing cheeks, my grandmother’s
dressing-gown even that she was wearing, all had prevented me for a
second from recognizing her and made me unsure whether I was asleep or
whether my grandmother had been resurrected. For a long time now, my
mother had resembled my grandmother far more than the young and laughing
Mama that my childhood had known. But I had never given it another
thought. Thus it is, when we have been sitting for a long time reading,
distracted, we have not noticed that time has been passing and we
suddenly find, round about us, the sun, drawn inevitably to pass through
the same phases, unmistakably recalling the sun there was at the same
hour the day before, and awakening around it the same harmonies, the
same correspondences preparatory to the sunset. It was with a smile that
my mother drew my attention to my mistake, for it was a comfort to her
to bear so close a resemblance to her mother. ‘I came, she said, because
when I was asleep I thought I could hear someone crying. It woke me up.
But how is it you’re not in bed? And your eyes are full of tears. What’s
the matter?’ I took her head in my arms: ‘Mama, there, I’m afraid you’ll
think me very changeable. But first of all, yesterday I didn’t talk to
you very nicely about Albertine; what I said was unfair. – But why
should that matter?’ my mother said, and catching sight of the rising
sun, she gave a sad smile, thinking of her mother, and so that I should
not lose the benefit of a spectacle that my grandmother regretted that I
never watched, she pointed to the window. But behind the beach of
Balbec, the sea, and the sunrise, to which Mama was pointing, I could
see, in a fit of despair that did not escape her, the room in
Montjouvain where Albertine, pink, curled up in a ball like a big cat,
with her mischievous nose, had taken the place of Mlle Vinteuil’s friend
and was saying, to peals of her voluptuous laughter: ‘Oh well, if we’re
seen, that’ll only make it better. Me, I wouldn’t dare spit on that old
ape?’ This was the scene I could see behind that spread out in the
window, which was nothing more than a mournful veil, superimposed on the
other like a reflection. It seemed itself indeed almost unreal, like a
painted view. Facing us, where the Parville cliffs jutted out, the leafy
tableau of the little wood where we had played hunt-the-ring sloped all
the way down to the sea, beneath the still golden sheen of the water, as
at that hour when often, at the day’s end, when I had gone to have a
siesta there with Albertine, we had got to our feet on seeing the sun go
down. In the disorder of the night mists that still hung in blue and
pink shreds over waters littered with the pearly debris of the dawn,
boats were passing, smiling at the oblique light that had turned their
sails and the tips of their bowsprits yellow, as when they return home
in the evening: an imaginary scene, shivering and deserted, a pure
evocation of the sunset, which did not rest, like the dusk, on the
succession of hours of the day that I was in the habit of seeing precede
it, slender, interpolated, more insubstantial even than the horrible
image of Montjouvain that it had not succeeded in cancelling out, in
covering, in concealing – a vain and poetic image of the memory and of
the dream. ‘But come, said my mother, you didn’t speak any ill of her,
you told me she bored you a little, that you were happy at having given
up the idea of marrying her. That’s no reason to cry like that. Remember
that your Mama is leaving today and is going to be desolate at leaving
her darling in this state. All the more, my poor child, because I hardly
have time to console you. For though my things may be ready, one doesn’t
have all that much time on a day of departure. – It’s not that.’ And
then, calculating the future, carefully weighing my determination,
realizing that an affection such as that of Albertine for the friend of
Mlle Vinteuil and over so long a period, can not have been innocent,
that Albertine had been initiated, and, as all her gestures had
demonstrated to me, had been born moreover with a predisposition to vice
of which my anxiety had all too often had a presentiment, to which she
can never have ceased to yield (to which she was perhaps yielding at
this very minute, taking advantage of a moment when I was not present),
I told my mother, knowing the pain I was causing her, which she did not
show and which betrayed itself in her only by that look of serious
concern she wore when she compared the gravity of making me unhappy or
of doing me harm, the look she had worn in Combray for the first time
when she had resigned herself to spending the night beside me, that look
which at this moment bore an extraordinary resemblance to that of my
grandmother when she allowed me to drink cognac, I said to my mother: ‘I
know the pain I’m going to cause you. First of all, instead of remaining
here as you wanted, I’m going to leave at the same time as you. But
that’s by no means all. I don’t feel well here, I prefer to go home. But
listen, don’t be too upset. It’s this. I was mistaken, I misled you in
good faith yesterday, I’ve been thinking it over all night. I absolutely
must, and let that be decided here and now, because I now realize
clearly, because I shan’t change again, and I couldn’t live without it,
I absolutely must marry Albertine.’
