

THE FUGITIVE


CHAPTER 1

_Grieving and Forgetting_

‘Miss Albertine has left!’ How much more sharply suffering probes the
psyche than does psychology! A moment earlier, as I analysed my
feelings, I had thought that leaving her, without ever seeing her again,
was exactly what I wanted, and comparing the mediocrity of the pleasure
which Albertine gave me with the richness of the desires which she
prevented me from achieving, I had concluded my subtle heart-searching
by finding that I no longer wanted to see her, that I no longer loved
her. But these words: ‘Mademoiselle Albertine has left’ had just caused
such pain in my heart that I felt that I could no longer hold out. Thus
something which I had thought meant nothing to me, was quite simply my
whole life. How little we know ourselves. I must immediately put an end
to my suffering; feeling as gentle with myself as my mother had been
with my grandmother on her deathbed, I told myself, with all the good
will that we lavish on those we love in order to spare them from
suffering, ‘Be patient just one moment, we’ll find a remedy, don’t
worry, we won’t let you suffer like this.’ It was in this realm of ideas
that my instinct for self-preservation sought the first balm available
in order to apply it to the open wound: ‘None of this is of any
importance, because I shall get her to return straight away. I’ll have
to think of a way, but in any case she will be here by this evening.
Therefore there is no need to worry.’ ‘None of this is of any
importance’, I was not content merely to persuade myself of this, but I
tried to give Françoise the same impression, by not revealing my torment
in her presence, because, even at the moment when I suffered so
violently, my love would not let me forget the importance of making it
appear to be a mutually happy love affair, above all in the eyes of
Françoise, who did not like Albertine and doubted her sincerity. It is
true that a moment earlier, before Françoise had appeared, I had thought
that I no longer loved Albertine, believing that I had taken everything
into account, that I was completely lucid and that I had plumbed the
depths of my heart. But however great our intelligence, it cannot
conceive all the elements that constitute it and which remain undetected
as long as no event capable of isolating them makes them start to
solidify out of the volatile state in which they exist for most of the
time. I was mistaken when I thought that I saw clearly into my heart.
But this knowledge, which the finest insights of my intellect had not
given me, had just been brought home to me, as hard, dazzling and
strange as crystals of salt, through the sudden stimulus of pain. I had
become so accustomed to having Albertine beside me, and now I suddenly
saw Habit in a completely new perspective. Until now I had considered it
above all as a negative force suppressing the originality and even our
awareness of our perceptions; now I saw it as a fearsome goddess, so
attached to us, with her inscrutable face so grafted on to our hearts
that if she detaches herself and turns away from us, this deity, whose
presence we were barely able to discern, inflicts upon us the most
terrible suffering, and then she is as cruel as death.

The most urgent thing was to read Albertine’s letter, since I needed to
consider how to bring her back. I imagined that this was within my
grasp, because, since the future exists only in our minds, we think that
we are still able to control it by a last-minute act of will-power. But
at the same time I remembered that I had seen the future inflected by
powers other than mine, against which, even with more time available, I
could have done nothing. What does it avail us that the hour has not yet
struck, if we can do nothing to prevent what it will bring? As long as
Albertine was still living with me, I was determined to maintain the
impetus of our separation. But now she had left. I opened Albertine’s
letter. This is what it said:

_‘My dear friend, do forgive me for not having dared to say to your face
the few words that follow, but I am a coward, I have always been so
afraid of facing you that, despite my efforts, I was unable to pluck up
the courage to do so. This is what I would have liked to tell you: “Life
together has become impossible, besides, you must have realized from
your tirade the other evening that something in our_ _relationship had
changed. What could have been remedied that evening was to become
irreparable over the next few days. It seems better therefore, since we
have been fortunate enough to settle our differences, to leave each
other on friendly terms”; that is why, my dearest, I am sending you this
note, and I beg that you will be kind enough to forgive me for causing
you a little grief, when you think of the far greater pain that I shall
suffer. My dear old friend, I do not want to become_ _your enemy, I
shall already find it difficult enough to see you gradually, but all too
swiftly, becoming indifferent towards me; and so since my decision is
irrevocable, before asking Françoise to hand you this letter I will
already have asked her to bring me my trunk. Farewell, I leave you with
the best of me. Albertine.’_

All of which means nothing, I told myself, it is even better than I had
thought, for since she does not believe a word of all this, she has
obviously written it only in order to make a scene, to frighten me, so
that I will stop behaving unreasonably towards her. The most urgent
thing to do is to make sure that Albertine returns home this evening.
How sad to think that the Bontemps are corrupt people, using their niece
to extract money from me. But no matter. Were I to offer half of my
kingdom to Mme Bontemps in order to have Albertine back here this
evening, enough would remain for Albertine and me to live in comfort.
And at the same time I was calculating whether I would have time that
morning to go out and buy the yacht and the Rolls-Royce that she
desired, and, abandoning all hesitation, did not consider for a moment
that I had thought it rather unwise to make her this gift. Even if Mme
Bontemps’s agreement is not sufficient, and Albertine refuses to obey
her aunt and stipulates as the condition of her return that she shall
henceforth enjoy complete independence, well then, however much sorrow
it should cause me, let it be; she may go out unaccompanied, as often as
she likes; we have to accept the need to make sacrifices, however
painful, in the interest of what we hold most dear, which for me,
despite what I believed this morning in the light of my precise and
absurd calculations, is that Albertine should live here with me. Should
I, however, add that granting her this freedom would have caused me
great distress? I would be lying. I had often previously felt that the
suffering caused by leaving her free to do wrong far away from me might
well be less than the kind of sadness which I sometimes experienced when
I sensed her boredom beside me at home. Of course if at any particular
moment, when she asked me if she could pay some visit, I would have
found the idea of letting her go appalling, imagining a whole programme
of orgies. But I had often been tempted to say, ‘Take our boat, take the
train, go away for a month to some country that I don’t know, where I’ve
never been, where I won’t know a thing about whatever you do,’ because I
thought that, once distant from me, she would prefer to be back with me
instead, and would be happier when she had returned. Besides, this is
surely what she wants: she does not actually demand such freedom, which,
I might add, I would easily manage to restrict from day to day by
offering her new pleasures every day. No, what Albertine wanted was for
me to stop behaving intolerably towards her, and above all – like Odette
with Swann in former times – for me to decide to marry her. Once
married, she would not worry about her independence; we would be so
happy living here together! Of course that would mean giving up any idea
of Venice. But how those much-desired cities like Venice – not to
mention hostesses like the Duchesse de Guermantes or entertainments like
the theatre – tend to pale, fade and die, when we are chained to another
heart by a bond so painful that it prevents us from parting! Besides,
Albertine is absolutely right on the question of marriage. Even Mama
finds all the delay ridiculous. Marrying her was what I should have done
ages ago, it’s what I must do now, that’s what has made her write this
letter, not one word of which she believes; it was in order to achieve
this that she renounced for a few hours something that she must want as
much as I want her to do it: to return home. Yes, that is what she
wants, that is her main intention, my reason said compassionately; but I
felt, as I argued, that my reason tended to pursue the hypothesis that
it had adopted at the outset, while I felt quite clearly that it was the
other hypothesis which had constantly been corroborated. Of course, this
alternative version would never have made so bold as to overtly
formulate the theory that Albertine might have had a relationship with
Mlle Vinteuil and her female friend. And yet, when I was overwhelmed
with this terrible news just as we were drawing into the station at
Incarville, it was the second hypothesis that had been confirmed. This
theory had never yet suggested that Albertine might leave me of her own
accord, in such a way, without warning and without giving me time to
stop her. But even if, after the enormous mental leap that I had been
obliged to take, the new reality which I had to face was as surprising
as any revealed by a physicist’s latest discovery, a prosecutor’s fresh
enquiry into a crime, or a historian’s new insight into some revolution,
this new reality went far beyond the half-hearted premonitions of my
alternative hypothesis, and yet helped to prove them right. This
alternative hypothesis was not one formulated by the intellect, and the
panic which I had experienced on the evening when Albertine had not
kissed me, or the night when I had heard her window opening, was not a
rational fear. But – as many episodes may already have indicated and
what follows will show all the more – the fact that the intellect is not
the most subtle, powerful and appropriate instrument for grasping the
truth is only one more reason in favour of starting with the intellect
rather than with the intuitions of the unconscious or with unquestioning
faith in our premonitions. It is life which little by little, case by
case, allows us to realize that what is most important for our hearts or
our minds is taught us not by reason but by other powers. And then it is
the intellect itself, which, recognizing their superiority, uses its
reasoning in order to abdicate in their favour and accepts the role of
collaborator and servant. It has ‘experimental faith’. The unexpected
unhappiness which confronted me already felt familiar (as did
Albertine’s friendship with two lesbians) from having been indicated by
so many signs in which (despite my rational arguments using Albertine’s
own pronouncements in order to prove the opposite) I had detected the
tedium and repugnance that she felt at living in this slavish manner, in
signs written as it were backwards and in invisible ink, in Albertine’s
sad and submissive eyes, on those cheeks suddenly inflamed by an
unexplained blush, or in the sound of a suddenly opened window! Of
course I had never dared analyse them fully enough to formulate the
precise image of her sudden departure. My spirits lulled by Albertine’s
presence, I had envisaged only a departure arranged by me at an
indeterminate date, that is, situated in a timeless zone; and
consequently had only imagined that I thought of her departure, in the
way that many people who think about death when they are in good health
imagine that they do not fear it, and in fact do no more than introduce
one purely negative notion into the heart of their good health, which
would be precisely what the approach of death would alter. Moreover the
idea of a parting planned by Albertine herself could have struck my mind
a thousand times over, as clearly and unambiguously as you like, without
my having any truer realization of what this departure would mean to me,
that is, what it would mean in reality – something original,
devastating, unknown, an entirely novel evil. Even if I had foreseen
this departure, I might have thought of it ceaselessly year after year,
without all such thoughts, even if joined together, having the slightest
connection either in intensity or in quality with the unimaginable hell
that Françoise had allowed me to glimpse when she said, ‘Miss Albertine
has left.’ In order to represent an unknown situation, the imagination
borrows elements already known, and for this reason fails to represent
it. But our sensibility, even at its most physical, remains scored long
afterwards by the original and long-indelible mark of the new event, as
the furrow scored by a flash of lightning. And I hardly dared admit to
myself that, if I had foreseen this departure, I would perhaps have been
incapable of representing it to myself in its true horror, and even if
Albertine had announced it to me, and I had threatened and implored her,
might have been incapable of preventing her. How far my desire for
Venice had now abated! Just as the desire to meet Mme de Guermantes in
Combray in days gone by had abated, at those moments when I held but one
thing dear, to have Mama in my bedroom. And it was in fact all the
worries that I had felt since I was a child that had been solicited by
this new source of anxiety and had rushed to reinforce it, amalgamating
themselves with it into one homogeneous mass which suffocated me.

Certainly, the physical heartache which such a separation deals and
which, through the body’s terrible ability to keep records, renders any
pain contemporary with all the periods in our lives when we have
suffered, – certainly this heartache, perhaps somewhat calculated – so
little do we care for the pain of others – by a woman desiring to make
us miss her as acutely as possible, whether the woman only pretending to
make her departure wishes merely to obtain more favourable conditions,
or whether leaving for ever – for ever! – she wants to strike a blow,
perhaps from vengeance, perhaps to continue to be loved, or perhaps to
preserve the quality of the memory that she will leave, and violently
break out of this network of tedium and indifference which she had felt
being woven around her, – certainly we had promised each other that we
would avoid such heartache, we had said that we would part on good
terms. But it is in fact very rare to part on good terms, for if all
were well we would not separate. And then again, the woman towards whom
we affect the utmost indifference does none the less feel obscurely
that, just as we have come to tire of her because of the force of habit,
so we have become all the more attached to her, and she guesses that one
of the essential requirements for parting on good terms is to warn her
partner that she is going to leave. Yet she fears that warning him may
prevent her. Every woman feels that, the greater is her power over a
man, the more her only way of leaving him is just to take flight. She
becomes a fugitive precisely because she was a queen, this is
inevitable. Certainly, there is a yawning gap between the tedium which
she inspired a moment ago and the furious need, once she has left, to
have her back. But there are reasons for this, above and beyond those
given in the course of this work and others which will be revealed
later. First and foremost, the departure often occurs at a moment when
our indifference – real or imagined – is at its greatest, at the
farthest extent of the pendulum swing. The woman thinks: ‘No, things
cannot go on like this,’ precisely because the man speaks only, or
thinks only, of leaving her. So the pendulum, as it returns to its other
extreme, opens the largest gap at this moment. A moment later it will
return to its starting-point: once more, despite all the reasons
proffered, everything seems so natural! Our heart starts to pound; and
besides, the woman who has left is no longer the same as the woman who
used to be there. Her life with us, which was too predictable, finds
itself suddenly enriched by all those other lives with which she will
inevitably become involved, and in order to become involved with which
she may have left us. As a result, this new complexity in the life of
the woman who has run away has a retrospective impact on the woman who
previously lived at our side, and was perhaps premeditating her
departure. To the set of psychological facts which we identify as part
of our life together, and part of our jealousy too (which imply that men
who have been left by several women have nearly all been left each time
in the same manner because of their identical and entirely predictable
characters and reactions: each has his own manner of being betrayed, as
he does of catching cold), although we do not find this set of facts too
mysterious, there doubtless corresponds a set of facts that we failed to
notice. She must have been corresponding with or contacting some man, or
woman, through a messenger, waiting for the signal which we may have
given ourselves without realizing it, by saying, ‘Monsieur X came to see
me yesterday,’ if she had agreed with Monsieur X that he would come to
see me on the eve of the day when she was due to meet him. How many
hypotheses were possible! But only possible. I constructed the truth so
well, but only in terms of possibilities, that one day, having opened a
letter addressed to one of my mistresses, a letter written in a coded
format, ‘Awaiting signal to visit Marquis de Saint-Loup, alert tomorrow
by telephone,’ I reconstituted some kind of planned escape; the name of
the Marquis de Saint-Loup was there only to signify something else, for
my mistress did not know Saint-Loup but had heard me speak of him, and
moreover the signature was a kind of nickname, lacking any recognizable
linguistic form. Yet the letter was not addressed to my mistress, but to
another person in the building whose name was different but had been
mistaken for hers. The letter was written not in a coded format but in
poor French, because it had been written by an American lady, who was
indeed one of Saint-Loup’s friends, as he informed me himself. And the
strange way in which this American lady formed some of her letters had
given the appearance of a nickname to a perfectly authentic but foreign
surname. I had therefore been entirely wrong in my suspicions that day.
But the intellectual framework that had linked these facts together in
my mind did provide a perfectly correct and unanswerable model for the
truth when my mistress (who at the time had been thinking of spending
her whole life with me) did leave me three months later, for it happened
in a fashion absolutely identical to the way I had imagined on the
previous occasion. A letter arrived, with the same characteristics which
I had wrongly identified in the earlier letter, but this time having
indeed the sense of a signal, and Albertine had thus premeditated her
escape for some time. This was the greatest misfortune of my life. And
in spite of everything, the suffering which it caused me was perhaps
even exceeded by my curiosity to know the causes of this disaster: whom
Albertine had desired, for whom she had left me. But the sources of
these great events are like those of rivers, we may well travel the
whole surface of the globe without being able to find them. Because at
the time it seemed simply attention-seeking and bad temper, what in
Françoise’s case we called ‘having the sulks’, I did not note that, from
the day when she had stopped kissing me, she took on a funereal air,
looking stiff and unbending, adopting a sad voice for even the most
simple things, moving slowly and never smiling. I cannot say that no
evidence proved that she had no contact with the outside world.
Françoise did in fact tell me that when she entered her room two days
before her departure, she had found nobody there and the curtains drawn,
but she had sensed from the atmosphere and the sounds in the room that
the window was open. And in fact she had found Albertine on the balcony.
But I cannot see with whom she could have communicated from there, and,
besides, the open window behind drawn curtains was easy to explain by
the fact that she knew how afraid I was of draughts, and that even if
the curtains were not much protection for me, they would have prevented
Françoise from seeing from the corridor that her shutters were open so
early. No, I can think of only one small detail, which proves merely
that she had decided the day before that she was going to leave. The day
before she had in fact taken from my room without my noticing a
considerable quantity of tissue paper and packing material, which I kept
there, and which she used throughout the night to wrap her countless
peignoirs and negligees in order to leave in the morning. That was the
only detail, that was all. I cannot attribute any importance to the fact
that during the evening she almost thrust upon me a thousand francs
which she owed me, there was nothing special in that, for she was
extremely scrupulous in matters of money.

Yes, she took the tissue paper the day before, but it was not just the
day before that she knew that she was going to leave! For it was not
sorrow that caused her to leave, but the decision that she had already
taken to leave, to renounce the life of which she had dreamed, which
gave her that sorrowful air. Sorrowful, almost solemnly cold with me,
except the last evening, when, after staying with me longer than she
wanted – which astonished me on her part since she usually wanted to
stay as long as possible – she stopped at the door and said, ‘Farewell,
my dear, farewell, my dear.’ But I paid no attention at the time.
Françoise told me that the following morning, when Albertine told her
that she was leaving, she was still so sad, and so much more stiff, so
much more unbending than the previous days (but this is however also
explicable through fatigue, for she had not undressed and had spent all
night packing, except for those possessions that were not in her room or
her dressing-room), that Françoise nearly fell over when she heard her
say, ‘Farewell, Françoise.’ When we hear of such things, we understand
that the woman who has come to please us so much less than all those who
are so easy to meet on the most casual occasion, the woman we resent for
making us sacrifice them for her, is on the contrary the one that we
would now prefer a thousand times over. For we are no longer asked to
choose between a certain pleasure – which custom and perhaps the
mediocrity of its object have rendered almost null and void – and other
more tempting and seductive pleasures, but between these pleasures and
something even stronger, compassion for her suffering.

In promising myself that Albertine would return home by the evening, I
had risen to the emergency and applied an emotional sticking plaster to
the wound opened up by tearing away my old belief. But however swift my
instinct for self-preservation had been, I had, when Françoise spoke,
remained helpless for a moment, and even though I now knew that
Albertine would be back that very evening, the pain I had felt during
the instant when I had not yet convinced myself of this return (the
instant that had followed the words, ‘Miss Albertine asked for her
trunk, Miss Albertine has left’), surged up again spontaneously within
me exactly as before, that is, as if I were still unaware of the
imminent return of Albertine. In any case, she must return, but of her
own accord. Whichever hypothesis was right, if I seemed to plead with
her or engineer her return, it would be counter-productive. There was no
doubt that I did not have the strength to renounce her that I had had in
the case of Gilberte. Even more than to see Albertine again, what I
wanted was to put an end to the physical anguish that my heart, in a
worse state than usual, could no longer bear. And then again, from the
sheer habit of avoiding any effort of will-power, whether for work or
for other things, I had become more of a coward. But above all my
anguish was incomparably stronger this time, for many reasons, of which
the most important was not perhaps that I had never tasted sensual
pleasure with Mme de Guermantes or with Gilberte, but that since I did
not see them every hour of every day and had no opportunity, and
consequently experienced no need, to do so, my love for them lacked the
all-powerful element of Habit. Perhaps, now that my heart, unable to
exercise its will and unable to withstand suffering willingly, felt that
there was only one possible solution, Albertine’s return at all costs,
or perhaps the contrary remedy (deliberate renunciation, gradual
resignation), would have struck me as the ending of a novel, implausible
in real life, if I had not already opted for this solution myself in the
case of Gilberte. I knew therefore that this other solution could also
be accepted, and by one and the same man, for I was still more or less
the same person. Yet time had played its part, time which had aged me,
time which had also placed Albertine perpetually by my side while we
were sharing our lives together. But at least, while not renouncing
Albertine, what remained for me of what I had felt for Gilberte was the
pride of not wanting Albertine to see me as a pathetic puppet if I asked
her to return. I did want her to return, but did not want to be seen to
care. I got up, so as to waste no time, but suffering stopped me in my
tracks: this was the first time that I had got up since Albertine’s
departure. And yet I must dress quickly in order to ask her concierge if
there was any news.

Suffering, as the aftermath of an unwelcome moral shock, aspires to
change form: we hope to dispel it by making plans, by seeking
information; we want it to pass through its countless metamorphoses, for
this requires less courage than keeping the suffering raw; we lie with
our suffering as in a bed too narrow, too hard, and too cold. So I stood
up again; I made my way around the room, but with infinite caution, I
took up positions where I would not catch sight of Albertine’s chair,
the pianola whose pedals had felt the pressure of her golden slippers,
or any of the objects which she had used, and which all, in the private
language that my memory had taught them, seemed to offer me a new
translation, another draft, announcing the news of her departure a
second time. But even without looking I saw them; my strength drained
away, I slumped down into one of those blue satin chairs whose sheen, in
the chiaroscuro of the room anaesthetized by a single shaft of daylight,
had an hour earlier invoked in me passionately nurtured dreams, which
now seemed utterly remote. Alas! Before this moment I had never sat in
one except in Albertine’s presence. So I could not stay seated, I got
back on to my feet; and thus at every moment, I had to meet one of those
countless, humble selves that compose us who had not yet learnt of
Albertine’s departure and inform them of it – this task was all more
cruel than if they had been strangers, and had not borrowed my
sensitivity in order to suffer – to announce the impending misfortune to
all of these people, all of these selves who did not yet know it; each
one of them in turn needed to hear these words for the first time
‘Albertine asked for her trunk’ – that coffin-shaped trunk which I had
seen loaded into the carriage at Balbec along with my mother’s luggage –
‘Albertine has left.’ I had to inform every one of them of my sorrow,
that sorrow which is not at all a pessimistic conclusion freely drawn
from a collection of sinister circumstances, but the intermittent and
involuntary revival of a specific impression, externally provoked rather
than chosen by us. Some of these selves I had not seen for quite a
while. For instance (I had not realized that it was the day for the
barber to call) the self that I was when I had my hair cut. I had
forgotten that self, his arrival made me burst out sobbing as would the
arrival at a funeral of an old, retired servant who knew the lady who
has just died. Then all of a sudden I remembered that over the last week
I had been seized from time to time by panic attacks, which I had not
admitted to myself. At those moments I had however argued with myself,
saying, ‘Surely there is no point in entertaining the hypothesis that
she might suddenly leave. It is absurd. If I had submitted this
hypothesis to a sensible and intelligent man (and I would have done, in
order to gain peace of mind, if jealousy had not prevented me from
taking anyone into my confidence), he would surely have replied: “But
you are mad. It’s impossible.” And indeed during those last days we had
not had a single quarrel. People leave for a reason. They tell you what
it is. They offer the right of reply. They do not just leave. No, that
is childish. That is the only absurd hypothesis.’ And yet every day,
when I found her still there when I rang for her in the morning, I had
breathed an enormous sigh of relief. And when Françoise had handed me
Albertine’s letter, I had immediately felt sure that it was about the
one unthinkable event, a departure somehow sensed several days in
advance, despite my logical reasons for being reassured. I had told
myself this in my despair with almost self-satisfied perspicacity, like
a murderer who knows that he cannot be found out but who is afraid and
suddenly sees the name of his victim written at the head of a file on
the desk of the examining magistrate who has summoned him to appear. My
only hope was that Albertine had gone to see her aunt in Touraine, where
she would in fact be quite closely supervised, and could not get up to
much harm before I collected her. My worst fear was that she might have
stayed in Paris or left for Amsterdam or Montjouvain, that is, that she
might have escaped to indulge in some intrigue whose preparations had
escaped my attention. But in fact as I thought of Paris, Amsterdam,
Montjouvain, that is, a variety of places, I was thinking of places
which were no more than possible; so when Albertine’s concierge replied
that she had left for Touraine, the location which I had thought I
preferred seemed to me the most awful of all, because it was real and
because for the first time, tortured by the certainty of the present and
the uncertainty of the future, I could visualize Albertine starting a
life intentionally separate from me, perhaps for some time, perhaps for
ever, and a life where she would attain that unknown which had formerly
so often disturbed me, even though I was lucky enough to possess and to
caress what lay outside, her sweet, captive, impenetrable face. It was
this unknown which lay at the heart of my love.

Outside Albertine’s door I found a little poor girl who looked at me
wide-eyed and who appeared so kind that I asked her if she wouldn’t like
to come home with me, as I might have invited a dog with a faithful
look. She seemed pleased. Once at home, I rocked her for a while on my
knees, but soon her presence, which made me feel Albertine’s absence too
keenly, became intolerable. And I asked her to leave, after giving her a
five-hundred-franc note. And yet, soon after, the thought of having some
other little girl by my side, of never being alone without the succour
of an innocent presence, was the only dream that made me able to bear
the idea that Albertine might stay away for some time before she
returned. As for Albertine herself, she hardly existed for me as more
than a name which, apart from some rare moments of respite on waking,
kept inscribing itself into my brain over and over again. If I had
thought aloud, I would have repeated it endlessly, and my verbiage would
have been as monotonous and limited as if I had been transformed into a
bird, like the one in the legend whose call repeats endlessly the name
of the woman that he loved when he was a man. You say it to yourself,
but as you do not say it out loud, it seems as if you are writing it
inside yourself, and it leaves its trace in the brain, which must
finally, like a wall on which someone has enjoyed scribbling, be
entirely covered by the name of the beloved, rewritten a thousand times.
We write it over and over again in our minds as long as we are happy,
even more when we are unhappy. And we feel the constantly renewed need
to repeat this name which tells us no more than what we already knew,
but, in the long run, we also feel fatigue. At this moment I did not
even think of carnal pleasure; I did not even see in my mind’s eye the
image of that Albertine, although she had been the cause of such a
revolution in my being, nor did I perceive her body, and if I had wanted
to isolate the idea – for there always is one – that connected it with
my suffering, it would have been in alternation, on the one hand,
wondering about her state of mind on leaving, whether she hoped to
return or not, on the other hand, wondering how to bring her back.
Perhaps there is a symbolic truth in the infinitely small place taken up
in our anxious feelings by the loved one to whom they relate. For her
person itself has little to do with it; it is almost entirely concerned
with the sequence of emotions and anxieties which chance made us feel
for her at some time or other in the past, and which habit has attached
to her. What proves this clearly (even more than the tedium that we find
in the midst of happiness) is how indifferent we will feel at seeing or
not seeing this same person, being esteemed by her or not, having her at
our disposal or not, once we no longer need ask the question only in
relation to this person alone (a question so superfluous that we will no
longer bother to ask it), – once this sequence of emotions and anxieties
is forgotten, at least in so far as they attach to her, for they may
have reappeared, but attached to somebody else. Before that, when these
emotions and anxieties were still attached to her, we believed that our
happiness depended upon her person: but it depended only on ending our
anxiety. At that time, therefore, our unconscious was more clear-sighted
than we were, reducing the beloved figure to such a small size, a figure
which we ourselves had perhaps forgotten, which we might have known
imperfectly and believed mediocre, in the terrible drama we enacted
where our very lives might have depended on tracking her down in order
to cease waiting for her. This scaling-down of the figure of the woman
is a logical and necessary effect of the way in which love develops, a
clear allegory of the subjective nature of this love.

Albertine’s state of mind when she left was no doubt similar in part to
that of those peoples who use a display of armed force to prepare the
ground for their diplomacy. She must have left me only to obtain from me
better terms, greater freedom, more luxury. In that case, I would have
emerged victorious, if I had had the strength to hold out, and wait for
the moment when, seeing that she had won nothing, she would return of
her own accord. But while in cards and in war, where winning alone
matters, we can call someone’s bluff, the situation created by love and
jealousy, not to mention suffering, is not the same. If I were to let
Albertine remain far away from me for several hours, perhaps for several
weeks, in order to wait, to ‘hold out’, I would ruin what had been my
goal for more than a year, which was never to leave her alone even for
an hour. All my precautions became pointless if I gave her the time and
the opportunity to deceive me at her leisure; and if in the end she did
surrender, I would never be able to forget the time when she had been
alone, and even if finally victorious, I would have suffered defeat in
the past, that is to say irrevocably.

As for the means of bringing Albertine back, they were all the more
likely to succeed if the hypothesis that she had left only in the hope
of being recalled on more favourable terms appeared to be the most
plausible. And doubtless for those who did not believe in Albertine’s
sincerity, certainly for Françoise for example, this was the case. But,
as far as my reason was concerned, the only explanation for some of her
bad moods and attitudes had seemed to be, even before I knew anything,
that she was planning her final departure; it was difficult to believe,
now that this departure had occurred, that it was only a pretence. I say
for my reason, not for my self. I found the hypothesis of a pretence all
the more necessary for being improbable and that it gained in strength
what it lost in verisimilitude. When we see ourselves on the brink of
the precipice and it seems that God has abandoned us, we no longer
hesitate to ask him for a miracle. I acknowledge that in all that I was
the most lax and yet the most vulnerable of policemen. But Albertine’s
flight had not restored to me the powers which the habit of having her
watched by others had taken away from me. I could think of only one
thing: entrusting someone else with the enquiry. This someone else was
Saint-Loup, who agreed. Passing on the anxiety that had haunted me for
so many days to someone else made me tremble with joy, as I felt certain
of success, and my hands turned suddenly dry as they had been before
becoming bathed in the sweat provoked by Françoise when she announced:
‘Mademoiselle Albertine has left.’ We should remember that when I
resolved to live with Albertine and even marry her, I had done so in
order to hold her, to know what she was doing, to prevent her from
returning to her old habits with Mlle Vinteuil. Even while reeling from
the savage blow caused by her revelation at Balbec, which she presented
as if it were the most natural thing in the world, and even though my
grief was greater than any I had ever experienced before, I did manage
to find quite natural the one thing that in my worst imaginings I would
never have dared suppose. (It is astonishing how jealousy, which spends
its time inventing so many petty but false suppositions, lacks
imagination when it comes to discovering the truth.) Yet my love, born
above all of the need to prevent Albertine from doing wrong, had
subsequently retained the mark of its origins. Being with her was not
important, as long as I could prevent my ‘runaway’ from wandering here
and there at will. In order to prevent her I had used as witnesses those
who accompanied her, and, as long as their evening reports, however
short, were safely reassuring, my worries would dissolve into a feeling
of good humour.

Once I had convinced myself that, whatever I might need to do, Albertine
would be back home that very evening, this eased the suffering that
Françoise had unleashed when she told me that Albertine had left (since
at the time I was taken unawares and believed for the moment that her
departure was irrevocable). But after a while, when the initial pain
welled up again spontaneously inside me, throbbing with its own
independent life, it was still as terrible as ever, because it preceded
the soothing promise that I had made myself to bring Albertine back that
very evening. My suffering heart was unaware of this declared intention,
which ought to have assuaged it. In order to deploy the means necessary
to ensure her return, I was condemned to act once more as if I were not
in love with her and were not suffering from her departure, I was
condemned to continue lying to her – not that I had ever been very
successful with this course of action, but because I had always adopted
it since I had been in love with Albertine. I could be all the more
energetic in finding ways to get her to return, in so far as I was the
one who appeared to have renounced her. I decided to write Albertine a
farewell letter in which I would assume her departure to be final, while
I would send Saint-Loup to exert the most brutal pressure on Mme
Bontemps, as if I were unaware of it, in order to get Albertine back as
soon as possible. Doubtless, I had learned with Gilberte the danger of
writing letters whose indifference, at first feigned, finally becomes
true. And this experience should have prevented me from sending
Albertine letters of the same type that I had written to Gilberte. But
what we call experience is only the revelation to our own eyes of one of
our own character traits, which recurs naturally, and recurs all the
more powerfully if we have already on some previous occasion brought it
up into the clear light of consciousness, so that the spontaneous
reaction which had guided us the first time becomes reinforced by all
the suggestions of memory. The kind of plagiarism which it is most
difficult for any human individual to avoid (and even for whole nations,
who persist in reproducing their faults and aggravate them in so doing)
is self-plagiarism.

I had commandeered Saint-Loup immediately, knowing him to be in Paris;
he rushed to my side, as swiftly and effectively as previously at
Doncières, and agreed to leave straight away for Touraine. I suggested
the following stratagem. He would stop at Châtellerault, ask for
directions to Mme Bontemps’s house, and wait until Albertine had gone
out, to avoid meeting her. ‘But does this mean that the young lady you
mention knows me?’ he asked. I told him that I did not think so. The
prospect of his action filled me with unbounded joy. And yet it was in
total contradiction with what I had promised myself at the outset: which
was to find a way to avoid appearing to send anyone to look for
Albertine; now this would inevitably seem to be the case; but it had an
inestimable advantage over ‘what I should have done’, in that it allowed
me to say to myself that someone sent by me would see Albertine, and
doubtless bring her back. And if I had been able to see clearly into my
heart at the outset, it would have been this solution, which lay lurking
in the shadows, but which I found deplorable, that I might have guessed
would take precedence over the prudent course of action which I had
decided to adopt, from lack of will power. Since Saint-Loup had already
seemed slightly surprised that I had had a young lady living with me
over the winter without telling him anything about it, and since in
addition he had often asked after the young lady from Balbec and I had
never replied, ‘But she lives here’, he could have been offended by my
lack of confidence in him. It was true that Mme Bontemps might talk to
him about Balbec. But I waited too impatiently on his departure and his
arrival to be willing or able to consider the possible consequences of
his journey. As for whether he would recognize Albertine (whom he had in
any case systematically avoided looking at when he had met her at
Doncières), everyone agreed that she had changed so much and put on so
much weight that it was hardly likely. He asked me whether I might not
have a portrait of Albertine. At first I said not, so that my
photograph, taken at about the time we had met in Balbec, would not give
him the opportunity to recognize Albertine, even though he had barely
glimpsed her in the railway carriage. But I reflected that in her most
recent photograph she would be as different from the Balbec Albertine as
the living Albertine was now and that he would no more recognize her in
the photograph than in real life. While I looked it out for him, he
smoothed my brow gently with his hand, trying to console me. I was moved
by the sorrow that he felt on imagining my suffering. In the first
place, although he was separated from Rachel, what he had felt at the
time was not so far in the past that he did not feel a particular
sympathy and pity for this kind of suffering, as we feel closer to
someone who has the same kind of illness as us. And then again, he felt
such affection for me that he found the thought of my suffering
unbearable. Thus for the woman who caused it he felt a mixture of
resentment and admiration. He saw me as such a superior being that for
me to be so subservient to another, she must be an absolutely
extraordinary creature. I imagined that he would find Albertine’s
photograph pretty, but even so I did not think that it would have the
same impact on him as Helen on the old men of Troy,¹ so while I kept
searching for it, I said modestly: ‘Oh, you mustn’t expect too much, you
know, in the first place it’s not a good photo, and anyway she’s not
very striking, she’s no great beauty, but she is very sweet.’ ‘Oh, no,
she must be marvellous,’ he said with sincere and naïve enthusiasm,
while trying to picture the person who could throw me into such a state
of agitation and despair. ‘I blame her for hurting you, but of course it
was very likely to happen to someone like you, artistic to your
fingertips, loving beauty in all things, and so passionately, you were
bound to suffer more than others when you found it in a woman.’ At last
I found the photograph. ‘She must be marvellous,’ Robert continued,
without realizing that I was holding out the photograph. Suddenly he
noticed it and held it for a moment in his hands. His face registered a
surprise that bordered on stupefaction. ‘Is this the girl that you
love?’ he said finally, in a voice whose astonishment was muted by the
fear of offending me. He made no comment, but had taken on the
judicious, prudent and inevitably slightly condescending air that we
adopt in the face of an invalid – even if the patient has previously
been a remarkable man, or even your friend – who is no longer
recognizable, for he is stricken with raving madness and is talking to
you of a celestial being who has appeared to him and whom he continues
to see exactly where you, the normal man, see only his eiderdown. I
immediately understood Robert’s astonishment, which was the same as that
which had engulfed me when I had caught sight of his mistress, with the
only difference that I had found her to be a woman whom I already knew,
whereas he believed that he had never seen Albertine. But doubtless in
each case the difference between what each of us saw in the same person
was just as great. It had been so long since I had tentatively started
at Balbec to add the sensations of taste, smell and touch to the visual
experience of watching Albertine. Since then, deeper, sweeter and less
definable sensations had been added, and then painful feelings. In short
Albertine, like a stone covered in snow, was no more than the core of an
immense construction elaborated by my heart. All these layers of
sensations were invisible to Robert, who grasped only the residue, which
my system on the contrary prevented me from perceiving. What had
disturbed Robert when he had seen Albertine’s photograph was not the
excitement of the old men of Troy saying, as they saw Helen pass:

Notre mal ne vaut pas un seul de ses regards,²

but exactly the opposite reaction, making him feel, ‘But is this what
has given you so much heartache, so much sorrow, led you into such
folly?’ We have to admit that this kind of reaction to the sight of the
person who has wounded and disturbed the life, and sometimes caused the
death, of someone we love is infinitely more common than that of the old
men of Troy, and, we must admit, is the norm. This is not only because
love is individual, nor because, when we do not feel it, we find it
natural to judge it avoidable and comment upon the folly of others. No,
it is also because when love has reached the stage when it causes such
misery, the network of sensations interwoven between the face of the
woman and the eyes of the lover, the fragile cocoon which protects and
hides it, much as a layer of snow cloaks a fountain, has already grown
so far that the point where the lover’s eyes focus, the point where he
confronts his pleasure and his pains, are as far from the point where
others see them as is the real sun from the point where its condensed
light makes us perceive it in the sky. And moreover during this time,
beneath the chrysalis of pain and tenderness which renders the worst
metamorphoses of the beloved invisible for the lover, her face has had
time to age and change. With the result that, if the face which the
lover saw for the first time is far removed from the one that he has
seen since he has been in love and suffering, so, conversely, it is
equally removed from the one that the indifferent spectator is able now
to see. (What if, instead of the photograph of a young woman, Robert had
seen that of an ageing mistress?) And we do not even have to see the
woman who has caused so much distress for the first time in order to
experience this astonishment. Often we knew her already, as my
great-uncle knew Odette. In this case the difference of perspective
affects not only someone’s physical appearance but also their character
and their individual impact. It is perfectly likely that the woman who
makes her lover suffer has always been very friendly to someone who was
not interested in her, as Odette, so cruel to Swann, had been the
kind-hearted ‘lady in pink’ for my great-uncle; or likely perhaps that
the person whose every move is anxiously anticipated by her lover, with
all the awe that would be due to a deity, appears as an inconsequential
person, only too pleased to do anything required, in the eyes of a man
who does not love her, as did Saint-Loup’s mistress for me, since I saw
in her no more than ‘Rachel, when of the Lord’, who had so often been
offered up to me. I remembered my stupefaction the first time that I had
seen her with Saint-Loup, at the thought that one could feel tormented
by not knowing what some woman had done one evening, what she might have
said under her breath to someone, why she might have wanted to leave.
Now I felt that this familiar story, although now that of Albertine,
towards whom every cord of my heart and my life was straining in a
frantic and chaotic process of suffering, must appear just as trivial to
Saint-Loup, and that one day it must appear so to me; that gradually, in
my feelings about the gravity or the insignificance of Albertine’s past,
I might pass from my state of mind at this moment to that of Saint-Loup,
for I had no illusions as to what Saint-Loup must think, as to what
anyone apart from the lover himself must think. And I was not too
worried. Let us leave pretty women to men with no imagination. I
remembered the tragic account of so many lives provided by a brilliant
but an unrealistic portrait such as that of Odette by Elstir, which is,
however, less the portrait of a woman in love than a portrait of love
and how it disfigures. All that was missing was – an attribute present
in so many portraits – that he should be not only a great painter but
also her lover (and even then there were people who said that Elstir had
been Odette’s lover). This disparity is proved by the whole life of a
lover, a lover like Swann, whose follies nobody understands. But if the
lover is also a painter like Elstir, then the answer to the riddle is at
hand, we at last have before our eyes the lips which common mortals have
never perceived in this woman, the nose which nobody realized she had,
that unsuspected allure. The portrait says: ‘What I have loved, what has
made me suffer, what I have always seen, is this.’ By an inverse
operation from the one where I had tried to invest Rachel in my mind
with everything that Saint-Loup had added to her of himself, I tried to
subtract my emotional and intellectual accretions from my composition of
Albertine and to picture her just as she must appear to Saint-Loup, as
Rachel had appeared to me. And even if we were to notice such
differences ourselves, what importance would we ascribe to them? And
when in former times at Balbec Albertine waited for me under the arcades
of Incarville and leapt into my car, not only had she not yet ‘filled
out’, but as a result of too much exercise she had rather melted away;
she was so thin, and disfigured by an unattractive hat, which allowed
only a glimpse of an unappealing part of her nose and a sidelong glance
at cheeks as white as maggots, I recognized very little of her, yet
enough for me to know as she leapt into my car that it was Albertine,
that she had kept the appointment on time and had not gone elsewhere;
and this was enough; what we love lives too deep in the past, consists
too much in the time we wasted together for us to need the whole woman;
we want to be sure only that she is the one, not to mistake her
identity, which is far more important for the lover than her beauty; her
cheeks may shrink, her body wither, even in the eyes of those who seemed
to others at first most proud to possess a beauty, and yet her sharp
little nose, that feature epitomizing her enduring personality, that
algebraic remainder, that constant factor, is enough to prevent a man
who frequents the highest social circles, if he is in love with her,
from enjoying a single evening’s peace, because he spends hour after
hour, until bedtime, combing and uncombing the hair of the woman he
loves, or simply staying at her side, to be with her, or to be sure that
she is with him, or even simply to prevent her from being with anyone
else.

‘Are you sure’, Robert asked, ‘that I can just come right out and offer
this woman thirty thousand francs for her husband’s electoral committee?
Is she so dishonest? If you are right, three thousand francs would be
enough.’ ‘No, I beg of you, don’t try to save money on something which I
hold so dear. What you must say, and there is some truth to it, is this:
“My friend had asked one of his relatives for these thirty thousand
francs for a committee run by his fiancée’s uncle. It’s because of his
engagement that they gave him the money. And he asked me to give it to
you so that Albertine would know nothing about it. And now Albertine is
leaving him. He does not know what to do. He is obliged to return the
thirty thousand francs if he does not marry Albertine. And if he does
marry her, she ought to return straight away, if only for the sake of
appearances, because it would look really bad if she stayed on the run
for too long.” Does that sound as if I made it up?’ ‘No, not at all,’
Saint-Loup replied, from kindness and from tact, and also because he
knew that circumstances are often much more bizarre than we think. After
all, there was no reason why there should not be, as I told him, a
considerable element of truth in this thirty-thousand-franc story. It
was possible, but it was not true, and it was precisely the most
truthful element that was the lie. But Robert and I did lie to each
other, as happens in any conversation when one friend sincerely wishes
to help another who is suffering from despair in his love life. The
friend who offers counsel, support and consolation can sympathize with
the other’s distress, but not feel it, and the more he tries to help,
the more he lies. And his friend confesses all that he needs in order to
be helped, but, precisely in order to be helped, may keep many things
hidden. And it is the helper who is happy, whatever pains he takes,
however long his journey, for he accomplishes his mission and feels no
inner suffering. At this moment I was in the same position as Robert had
been at Doncières when he thought that Rachel had left him. ‘Very well,
as you wish; if I encounter opposition I’ll face it willingly, for your
sake. And although I find it rather odd to set up such a blatant deal, I
know well enough that even in our own circles there are duchesses, even
the most strait-laced, who would do more embarrassing things for thirty
thousand francs than tell their nieces not to stay in Touraine. But in
any case, it doubles my pleasure to do you this favour, if that is what
it takes for you to agree to see me. If I get married,’ he added, ‘might
we not see more of each other, might you not come to feel as much at
home in my house as yours?’ He stopped suddenly, having thought, I
presumed, that if I too were to marry, Albertine could not become a
close friend of his wife. And I remembered what the Cambremers had told
me about his likely marriage with the daughter of the Prince de
Guermantes.

When he had consulted the time-table, he saw that he could not leave
Paris before the evening. Françoise asked me: ‘Should I remove Miss
Albertine’s bed from the study?’ ‘On the contrary,’ I replied, ‘please
make it up.’ I was hoping that she would return from one day to the next
and I did not want Françoise even to guess that this might be in doubt.
I needed Albertine’s departure to seem to have been agreed with me, with
no implication that she loved me any the less. But Françoise looked at
me with an air, if not of incredulity, at least of doubt. She too had
her own two hypotheses. Her nostrils flared as she scented trouble, and
she must have been scenting it for some time. And if she was not
perfectly sure, it was perhaps only because, like me, she was suspicious
of believing absolutely in something that would give her too much
pleasure. Now the burden of the affair weighed not on my exhausted mind
but on Saint-Loup. I was buoyed up by the joyful feeling that I had
reached a decision, saying to myself, ‘I have returned her shot, on the
volley.’

Saint-Loup could barely have caught the train when I bumped into Bloch
in my lobby, not having heard him ring the door-bell, so that I had no
alternative but to entertain him for a moment. Recently he had met me
out walking with Albertine (whom he knew from Balbec) one day when she
was in a bad mood. ‘I have dined with M. Bontemps,’ he told me, ‘and as
I have some influence on him, I told him that I was distressed to note
that his niece was not more kindly disposed towards you, and that he
ought to implore her to address this issue.’ I seethed with rage: this
imploring and complaining would undermine the whole impact of
Saint-Loup’s enterprise and would implicate me directly as far as
Albertine was concerned by making me seem to beseech her. To add insult
to injury Françoise had remained in the lobby and heard everything. I
protested vigorously to Bloch, telling him that I had never asked him to
undertake any such mission and that moreover the facts he mentioned were
untrue. From then on Bloch started smiling more and more broadly, less,
I believe, from amusement than from embarrassment at having annoyed me.
He jokingly expressed his astonishment at having aroused such anger.
Perhaps he said this to diminish in my eyes the importance of his
indiscreet initiative, perhaps because he was of a cowardly nature and
wallowed pleasurably and languidly in a life of lies, like a jelly-fish
floating on the surface of the sea, or perhaps because, even had he been
of another race of men, other people, since they can never share exactly
our point of view, do not understand the extent of the harm that their
randomly chosen words can cause. I had only just shown him the door,
finding no remedy for what he had done, when the bell rang again and
Françoise handed me a summons from a chief inspector of police. The
parents of the little girl that I had taken home with me for an hour had
decided to lodge a complaint against me for seducing a minor. There are
moments in our lives when a kind of beauty is born of the multiplicity
of the trials, interwoven like Wagnerian motifs, that assail us, as well
as of the simultaneous realization that real events do not fit into the
pattern of reflections pictured in the poor little mirror called the
future that the intellect holds out before our eyes, but lurk on the
threshold ready to pounce on us, like a detective waiting to catch
someone _in flagrante delicto_. Already, left to their own devices,
events evolve, whether because failure amplifies their importance in our
eyes or whether because satisfaction reduces it. But they rarely come
singly. The sentiments aroused by each of them contradict each other,
and to a certain extent, as I felt while on my way to meet the chief
inspector, fear is at least a temporary and fairly potent emetic for
emotional troubles. At the police station I was greeted with insults
from the parents, who told me that they would not ‘swallow that kind of
deal’ and handed back the five hundred francs, which I refused to
accept, and by the chief inspector, who, taking as his model the supreme
talent of presiding magistrates for ‘repartee’, seized on a single word
in each sentence I uttered and used it as part of a witty and crushing
rejoinder. No one even discussed my innocence in the case, for it was
the one hypothesis that no one would entertain for a minute.
Nevertheless the difficulty of bringing a charge meant that I was let
off with this ferocious grilling, which lasted as long as the parents
were there. But as soon as they had left, the chief inspector, who had a
weakness for little girls, changed his tone of voice and reprimanded me
as a partner in crime: ‘Another time you should take more care. Good
Lord, don’t pick them up so abruptly, it’s bound to fail. Besides, you
can find plenty of little girls better than her, and far cheaper. The
price you paid was ridiculously steep.’ I felt so sure that he would
misunderstand me if I tried to explain myself that I took advantage of
his invitation to leave, without saying another word. Each stranger I
passed on the way home seemed to be a police inspector spying on my
every act and gesture. But this leitmotif, like that of my anger against
Bloch, faded, leaving room only for that of Albertine’s departure. Now
this motif started up again, but on an almost joyful note now that
Saint-Loup had left. Since he had taken it upon himself to go to see Mme
Bontemps, my suffering had become more diffuse. I believed that it was
because I had acted, and I believed it in all good faith, for we never
know what is hidden in the depths of our own souls. Deep down, what made
me happy was not that I had passed the burden of my indecision on to
Saint-Loup, as I believed. Actually I was not entirely mistaken; the
specific remedy for the cure of an unfortunate event (and three-quarters
of all events are unfortunate) is a decision; for deciding has the
effect of suddenly reversing our thoughts and stemming the flow of those
which derive from the past event and prolong its resonance, blocking it
with a contrary flow of thoughts, brought in from outside, from the
future. But these new thoughts are beneficial for us chiefly (as with
those that invaded me at that moment) when what they bring us from the
depths of the future is hope. Deep down what made me so happy was the
secret certainty that, since Saint-Loup’s mission could not fail,
Albertine was bound to return. I understood this when as soon as I had
not received a reply from Saint-Loup by the end of the first day, I
started to suffer again. It was therefore not my deciding to surrender
all powers to him that was the cause of my joy, which otherwise would
have been boundless, but my thinking ‘Success is certain’ while saying
‘What will be, will be’ And the thought, aroused by his delay, that in
fact something other than success could arise was so hateful to me that
I had lost my gaiety. It is in fact our prediction, our expectation of
happy events that fills us with a joy which we attribute to other causes
and which ceases only when it plunges us back into our sorrows, if we
are no longer so sure that our wishes will be fulfilled. It is always
this invisible belief that sustains the whole structure of our
sensibility, which, when deprived of this, crumbles. We have seen how
this determines for us the value or the nullity of people, our
enthusiasm or boredom on meeting them. Similarly it decides whether a
sorrow seems tolerable and unexceptional, simply because we are
convinced that it will come to an end, or whether it suddenly expands
until someone’s presence becomes as important as our own lives,
sometimes more. One extra thing finally made the pain I felt in my
heart, which, I have to admit, had diminished, as acute as it had been
at the start. This was rereading a phrase from Albertine’s letter.
However much we love a person, the suffering caused by losing her, when
in our solitude we have nothing else on our mind, which can to a certain
extent give the suffering whatever form it wants, is bearable and
differs from the less human and personal suffering of those more
unpredictable and eccentric accidents of our mental or emotional worlds
– which are caused less directly by the person herself than by the
manner in which we have learned that we will never see her again. As for
Albertine, I could think of her and weep quietly, accepting that I would
no more see her this evening than I had yesterday, but to reread ‘my
decision is irrevocable’ was something else, it was like taking some
drug so dangerous that it could cause a fatal heart attack. There are in
the actions, details and letters of a separation, specific dangers which
amplify and distort even the pain that people can cause us. But this
suffering did not last long. Despite everything, I was so sure of
Saint-Loup’s skill and success, and Albertine’s return seemed to me to
be something so certain, that I started to wonder whether I had been
right to want it. Unfortunately for me, who had thought the police
affair was over and done with, Françoise came to announce that an
inspector had called to enquire whether I might not be in the habit of
inviting young girls home, and that the concierge, thinking that he
meant Albertine, had replied that I was, and that, from then on, the
house seemed to be under surveillance. From that moment on it would
never again be possible for me to invite a little girl into my home to
share my sorrows, without running the risk of being shamed in front of
her by an inspector springing up and making her see me as a criminal.
And at one and the same time I realized how we live more through certain
dreams than we think, for the impossibility of ever cradling a little
girl in my arms seemed to drain my life of all value for evermore, but
in addition I realized how easy it is to understand that people may
easily risk their fortunes and their lives, when we think that
self-interest and the fear of death rule the world. For if I had thought
that the arrival of the police could cause even a little girl who did
not know me to form a shameful idea of me, how much I would rather have
killed myself! There was not even any possible comparison between the
two kinds of suffering. But in real life people never think that those
to whom they offer money, or whom they threaten to kill, might have a
mistress or even simply a companion whose esteem they value, even if
they do not value their own. But, suddenly, in a moment of unwitting
confusion (for in fact I had never imagined that if Albertine had not
been over the age of consent, she would have lived with me, let alone
been my mistress), I thought that ‘the seduction of minors’ could also
refer to Albertine. Thus my life seemed walled in on all sides. And at
the thought that I had not lived a chaste life with her, I found in the
punishment inflicted on me for having cradled an unknown little girl in
my arms the balance which always occurs in human punishment, suggesting
that there is hardly ever either a just condemnation or a judicial
error, but a kind of harmony between the false notion of an innocent act
entertained by the judge and the culpable actions which he has ignored.
But then, thinking that Albertine’s return could bring upon me an
ignominious charge which would degrade me in her eyes and would perhaps
cause her some harm that she would not forgive me, I ceased to wish for
her return, which terrified me. I wished I could telegraph her
immediately not to return. Then immediately, drowning all else, a
passionate desire for her return invaded me. It was because, having
envisaged for a moment the possibility of telling her not to return and
of living without her, I suddenly felt on the contrary ready to
sacrifice all travel, all pleasure, all work, for Albertine to return!
Oh, how my love for Albertine, whose outcome I had thought I could
predict after what had happened to my love for Gilberte, had developed
in exactly the opposite way to the latter! How impossible it was for me
to continue not to see her! And with every action accomplished, even the
most trivial, as long as it had previously been bathed in the happy
atmosphere of Albertine’s presence, I found it necessary each time, with
further effort and equal suffering, to renew my apprenticeship of
separation. Then competition with other forms of life cast this new pain
into the shadows, and during those days, which were the first days of
spring, I even experienced, while waiting for Saint-Loup to arrange to
see Mme Bontemps, a few moments of pleasant calm, imagining Venice and
meeting beautiful, unknown women. As soon as I realized this I felt
panic within me. The calm which I had just sampled was the first
appearance of the great but intermittent force which would struggle
within me against pain and against love, and would ultimately overcome
them. What I had just had a foretaste and foreboding of, if only for a
moment, was that which would later become a permanent state for me, a
life where I would no longer suffer because of Albertine, where I would
no longer love her. And my love, which had just recognized the only
enemy able to vanquish it, the act of forgetting, started to tremble,
like a lion enclosed in a cage which has suddenly seen the python that
will devour it.

I thought constantly of Albertine, and when Françoise entered my room
she could never say, ‘There are no letters’ soon enough to cut short my
anxiety. But from time to time, by letting some current of ideas or
other flow through my sorrow, I managed to refresh and ventilate a
little the stuffy atmosphere of my heart. But then in the evening, if I
managed to get off to sleep, it was as if the memory of Albertine had
been the medicine which had induced my sleep, which as its effects wore
off, would waken me. I thought of Albertine all the time that I was
asleep. It was a very special sleep, which only she could provide me
with and, what is more, one where I would not have been free, as I might
during my waking hours, to think of anything else. Sleep and her memory
were like two substances mingled together to form a sleeping-draught.
Moreover during my waking hours my suffering increased day by day
instead of diminishing. Not that the work of forgetting was not under
way, but it was precisely this process that enhanced my idealization of
the missing image and thereby the absorption of my initial suffering
into the other analogous sufferings which reinforced it. Even then this
image was bearable. But if I suddenly thought of her room, her room with
its bed lying empty, of her piano, of her motor-car, I lost all my
strength, I closed my eyes, and my head slumped on my shoulder as if I
were about to faint. The sound of a door opening hurt me almost as much,
because it was not being opened by her.

When there might be a telegram from Saint-Loup I did not dare ask, ‘Is
there a telegram?’ One did finally come, but it only postponed
everything by saying, ‘The ladies have gone away for three days.’
Doubtless, if I had tolerated the four days that had already elapsed
since her departure, it was because I said to myself, ‘It’s only a
matter of time, she will be back before the end of the week.’ But this
argument could not prevent the fact that for my heart and for my body,
the actions which I had to perform were the same: to live without her,
to go home and find her not there, to walk past the door to her room –
the courage to open it still failed me – knowing that she was not there,
to go to bed without saying good-night to her, those were actions which
my heart had had to perform to the full, for all their terror, and in
just the same way as if I were never to see Albertine again. Yet the
fact that I had already performed them four times in my heart proved
that I was now capable of continuing to do so. And soon perhaps I would
no longer need to rely on this argument – the imminent return of
Albertine – which was helping me to continue to live (I could say to
myself, ‘She will never return,’ and carry on living regardless, as I
had done for the last four days), just as a cripple who has learned how
to walk again can throw away his crutches. No doubt in the evening when
I came home I still found memories which left me breathless and
suffocating with emptiness and loneliness, memories juxtaposed in an
interminable series of all the evenings when Albertine was waiting for
me; but already I found the memory of the day before, the day before
that and the two preceding evenings, that is the memory of the four
evenings which had passed since Albertine’s departure, during which I
had remained on my own without her, yet when I had none the less
survived for four evenings already, composing a very thin layer of
memories compared to the others, but which might perhaps thicken with
every passing day. I need hardly describe the letter of proposal which I
received at that period from a niece of Mme de Guermantes, reputedly the
prettiest young lady in Paris, nor the advances made to me by the Duc de
Guermantes on behalf of her parents, resigned in the interests of their
daughter’s happiness to such a misalliance and with such an unequal
party. Such events, which might otherwise touch our self-esteem, are too
painful when we are in love. We would like to reveal their import, were
it not tactless to do so, to the other lady, who has formed a less
favourable opinion of us, although this opinion would still not be
modified if she learned that we might be the object of an entirely
different opinion. What the Duc’s niece wrote to me could only have
irritated Albertine.

From the moment that I awoke and resumed my sorrows at the point where I
had left off before falling asleep, like a book closed for an instant
but which would haunt me all day until evening, it could only be with
thoughts about Albertine that any feelings, whether arising from within
or without, might be associated. The door-bell rang: it’s a letter from
her, perhaps herself in person! If I was feeling well, and neither too
unhappy nor too jealous, and had nothing to reproach her with, then I
wished I could see her soon, embrace her, and spend the rest of my life
in happiness by her side. To telegraph her saying, ‘Come quickly’ seemed
to me to have become an entirely simple thing to do, as if my new mood
had changed not only my inner disposition but the external circumstances
of our relationship and had made everything easier. If I was in sombre
mood, and all my anger against her returned, then I no longer wanted to
embrace her, I felt that it would be impossible ever to attain happiness
through her, and I wanted nothing but to harm her and prevent her from
belonging to anyone else. But the result of these two contradictory
moods was identical, she must return as soon as possible. And yet,
however much joy her return might give me when it happened, I felt that
the same difficulties would soon arise again and that seeking happiness
through satisfying my inner desires was as naïve as undertaking to reach
the horizon by simply walking forward in a straight line. The more
desire advances, the more true possession recedes. So that if it is
possible to obtain happiness, or at least freedom from suffering, what
we should seek is not the satisfaction, but the gradual reduction and
final elimination of desire. We try to see those we love, we should try
not to see them, for only the process of forgetting leads finally to the
extinction of desire. And I imagine that if an author wanted to express
this kind of truth, he would seek to approach the woman concerned by
dedicating his book to her, saying, ‘This is your book.’ And thus, in
telling the truth in the book he would be lying in the dedication, for
he will want the book to be hers only in the same way that he takes
possession of the gemstone that she gave him, which he will only
consider precious as long as he still loves the woman. The links between
another person and ourselves exist only in our minds. Memory weakens
them as it fades, and despite the illusions which we hope will deceive
us and with which, whether from love, friendship, politeness, human
respect or from duty, we hope to deceive others, we exist on our own.
Man is a being who cannot move beyond his own boundaries, who knows
others only within himself, and if he alleges the contrary, he is lying.
And I would have been so afraid that someone might take away my need for
her and my love for her, had they been able to do so, that I convinced
myself that these were essential for my life. To be able to hear the
names of the stations on the railway line to Touraine without feeling
pleasure or pain would have seemed to me a diminution of the self
(simply because deep down this would have proved that I was becoming
indifferent to Albertine). I told myself, while I could not stop
wondering what she might be doing, thinking and hoping at every moment,
wondering whether she intended to and was going to return, that it was
in my interest to keep open the communicating door that love had
unlocked within me and feel a different woman’s life burst through the
floodgates and pour into the reservoir which would otherwise have dried
up. Soon, as Saint-Loup’s silence continued, a secondary anxiety –
waiting for a telegram or a telephone call from Saint-Loup – masked the
first anxiety, worrying over the outcome, wondering whether Albertine
would return. Listening out for every sound while expecting a telegram
became so intolerable for me that the arrival of this telegram, whatever
it might say, was the only thing that I could think of now that might
put an end to my suffering. But when I did finally receive a telegram
from Robert, where he told me that he had seen Mme Bontemps, but had
been seen by Albertine despite all his precautions, which had ruined
everything, I exploded with fury and despair, for this was what I had
wanted to avoid above all. Now that Albertine had found out about it,
Saint-Loup’s journey would make me appear to hold her dear in a way that
could only prevent her from returning, and what is more, my horror of
this was the last shred of pride surviving from my love for Gilberte,
and now it was lost. I cursed Robert, then told myself that if these
means had failed, I would use others. Since man can have an impact on
the external world, how could I not manage, by exploiting cunning,
intelligence, money and affection, to suppress this atrocious thing: the
absence of Albertine? We believe that we may change things around us to
suit our desires, we believe this because otherwise we can see no
acceptable solution. We do not think of the solution which occurs most
frequently and which is also acceptable: when we do not manage to change
things to suit our desires, but our desires gradually change. We become
indifferent to a situation which we had hoped to change when we found it
unbearable. We were not able to overcome the obstacle, although this was
our only desire, yet life led us round or beyond it, and afterwards, if
we turn back towards the past we can hardly catch sight of it in the
distance, so imperceptible has it become. I heard some tunes from
_Manon_³ played by one of our neighbours on the floor above ours. I
applied their familiar words to Albertine and myself, and I was filled
with such deep feelings that I began to weep. They were:

Hélas, l’oiseau qui fuit ce qu’il croit l’esclavage,

Le plus souvent, la nuit d’un vol désespéré revient battre au vitrage⁴

and the death of Manon:

Manon réponds-moi donc! – Seul amour de mon âme,

Je n’ai su qu’aujourd’hui la bonté de ton cœur.⁵

Since Manon did return to Des Grieux, it seemed to me that for Albertine
I was the only love of her life. Alas, it is likely that if she had been
able to listen to the same tune at that moment, it would not have been
me that she would have cherished under the name of Des Grieux, and, if
she had thought of it for even a moment, her memories of me would have
prevented her from weakening as she listened to this music, which was
however very much the kind of music that she liked, although better
written and more subtle.

As for me, I was not brave enough to yield to the sweetness of thinking
that Albertine used to call me her ‘soul’s only love’ and had recognized
that she had been mistaken over her ‘seeming slavery’. I knew that one
cannot read a novel without lending its heroine the features of the
woman that one loves. Yet even if the book does have a happy ending, our
love has not progressed an inch, and when we have finished it, the woman
whom we love and who has finally surrendered to us in the novel, does
not in real life love us any more than she did before. I sent Saint-Loup
a furious telegram demanding his immediate return to Paris, to avoid at
least the appearance of aggravating through added persistence the
intervention which I had so wanted to keep secret. But even before he
had returned in accordance with my instructions, I had received the
following telegram from Albertine herself:

MY DEAR FRIEND, YOU HAVE SENT YOUR FRIEND SAINT-LOUP TO SEE MY AUNT,
WHICH WAS RIDICULOUS. IF YOU NEEDED ME, MY DEAR, WHY DID YOU NOT WRITE
DIRECTLY TO ME? I WOULD HAVE BEEN ONLY TOO PLEASED TO RETURN: DO NOT TRY
ANY SUCH ABSURD APPROACH AGAIN. ‘I would have been only too pleased to
return!’ If she said this, it must mean that she regretted having left,
and that she was looking only for an excuse to return. So I only had to
do what she said, write and tell her that I needed her, and she would
return. So I was going to see her again, my Balbec Albertine (for, since
her departure, this is what she had become for me. Like a sea-shell
which we no longer notice because it is always placed on top of the same
chest of drawers, but which, despite having entirely forgotten it, we
call to mind as soon it has disappeared, whether because we lost it or
because we gave it away, she recalled for me all the joyous beauty of
the blue hills of the sea.) And it was not only because she had become
an imaginary, that is, a desirable creature, but because my life with
her had become an imaginary life, that is, a life liberated from all
problems, that I said to myself, ‘How happy we shall be!’ But as soon as
I was assured of her return, I should not appear to precipitate things,
but on the contrary erase the bad impression created by Saint-Loup’s
intervention, which I might always disclaim later by saying that he had
acted on his own initiative because he had always been in favour of our
marriage.

However, as I reread her words I was none the less a little disappointed
to realize how little of our person remains in our correspondence. Of
course the characters we trace express our thoughts, as do our features;
it is always a process of thinking that confronts us. But even so, in a
person, thought appears to us only after being filtered through the
bloom of the face, flowering like a water-lily only on the surface. And
this, it has to be said, does modify it considerably. And perhaps one of
the causes of our perpetual disappointment in love is this perpetual
slippage, which causes every anticipation of the ideal being whom we
love to be confronted at each meeting by a flesh-and-blood person who
already has little in common with our dream. And then, when we expect
something from this person, what we receive from her is a letter where
very little of the person herself remains, as in those letters used in
algebraic formulae, where there remains none of the qualities
characterized by the arithmetical numbers, which themselves already no
longer encapsulated the properties of the fruit or the flowers that were
being assessed. And yet love itself, the experience of being loved, or
reading love letters, are perhaps none the less translations – however
unsatisfactory it is to pass from one to the other – of the same
reality, since the letter seems insufficient only while we are reading
it, and yet we sweat blood and tears as long as we await its arrival,
and it does suffice to calm our anguish, even if its little black marks
do not entirely assuage our desire, which feels in spite of everything
that these are no more than an approximation to speech, smiles and
kisses rather than those things themselves.

I wrote to Albertine:

‘_My dear friend, I was in fact just about to write to you, and I am
grateful to you for telling me that, had I needed you, you would have
come with all speed; it is_ _good of you to interpret in such noble
fashion your duty to an old friend, and my esteem for you can only be
enhanced. But, actually, no, I had not asked you to return and shall not
ask you to; perhaps an unemotional young woman like you might not find
it painful to meet again, at least in the distant future. But I, whom
you have sometimes believed so indifferent, would find it much more so.
Life has_ _led us apart. You have taken a decision which seems to me
very wise and is one which you have taken at the right moment, with
remarkable foresight, for you left me the very day after I had just
received my mother’s consent to ask for your hand. I would have told you
on waking, when I received her letter (at the same time as yours!).
Perhaps you would have feared upsetting me if you had left in those_
_circumstances. And perhaps we might have united our lives for what
might, who knows, have been our misfortune? If that were to be our fate,
bless you for your wise decision. We would lose all the benefit of this
were we to meet again. I do not say that I would not find this very
tempting. But I have no great merit in resisting. You know how
inconstant and forgetful I am. So I am not much to be pitied. You_ _have
often said yourself what a creature of habit I am. The habits which I am
starting to form in your absence are not yet very strong. Obviously for
the moment those which we had acquired together and which your departure
has disturbed are still stronger. They will not remain so for much
longer. I even thought, for this reason, that I would make the most of
these last few days where meeting you would_ _not yet be for me what in
a fortnight, or earlier perhaps (excusing my frankness), it will become,
that is, a nuisance, – I had thought that I would make the most of it,
before we finally forget each other, to settle one or two minor material
matters with you, whereby the generous and charming friend that I know
you to be might do a favour to the man who for a few moments believed
himself to be engaged to_ _you. As I had no reason to doubt my mother’s
approval, and as, on the other hand, I wished each of us to dispose of
that freedom which you have too kindly and abundantly sacrificed on my
behalf, which could be envisaged if we intended to spend even only a few
weeks of our lives living together, but which would have become as
odious to you as to me once we were due to spend the whole of our lives_
_together (in writing this to you I feel almost hurt to think that we
were only a few seconds away from bringing this to fruition), I had
thought to organize our existence along the most independent lines
possible and, to start with, I wanted you to have a yacht on which you
might have sailed while I was too ill to do anything but wait for you in
port; I had written to Elstir to ask for his advice, since you
appreciate_ _his taste. And back on dry land, I would have wished you to
have a motor-car all to yourself, which you would use for your own
visits and travel at your leisure. The yacht was already almost fitted
out, it is called, in accordance with the wish that you expressed at
Balbec_, le Cygne.⁶ _And remembering that you preferred the Rolls to all
other cars, I had ordered one for you. Now however that we shall never
meet again, since I cannot hope to persuade you to accept either the
boat or the car_ _(which are of no use to me) I had thought – since I
had asked an agent to order them on my behalf but giving them your name
– that you might perhaps, by taking it upon yourself to cancel the
order, spare me the embarrassment of owning a useless yacht and a
useless car. Yet for this, as for many other things, we would have had
to speak together. But I feel that for as long as I might be likely to
fall in love with you again, which will not be for much longer, it would
be crazy_, _merely for the sake of a sailing-boat and a Rolls-Royce, to
meet again and prejudice your lifelong happiness, since you have decided
that this consists in living far from me. So I prefer to keep the Rolls
and even the yacht. And as I shall use neither of them, and as they are
likely to remain unrigged in the harbour and_ _parked in the stables, I
shall have inscribed on the ——— of the yacht (heavens, I dare not use
the wrong technical term and commit a solecism which would shock you)
these lines from Mallarmé which you used to love:_

Un cygne d’autrefois se souvient que c’est lui

Magnifique mais qui sans espoir se délivre

Pour n’avoir pas chanté la région où vivre

Quand du stérile hiver a resplendi l’ennui.⁷

_Do you remember, it is from the poem whose first line is:_ Le vierge,
le vivace et le bel aujourd’hui.⁸ _Alas, today is no longer either
virgin or beautiful. But those who, like me, know that they will soon
turn it into a better “tomorrow” for themselves, are themselves
difficult to tolerate. As for the Rolls, it would have deserved rather
the following lines from the same poet, which you claimed not to
understand:_

Dis si je ne suis pas joyeux

Tonnerre et rubis aux moyeux

De voir dans l’air que ce feu troue

Avec des royaumes épars

Comme mourir pourpre la roue

Du seul vespéral de mes chars.⁹

_Farewell for ever, my sweet Albertine, and thank you once again for the
pleasant trip that we enjoyed together the day before we parted. I shall
remember it fondly_.

_PS – I shall not reply to what you tell me of the proposals allegedly
made to your aunt by Saint-Loup (whom I do not believe to be anywhere
near Touraine). It’s pure Sherlock Holmes. What can you think of me?’_

No doubt, just as I had said to Albertine in the past ‘I do not love
you’, in order to get her to love me, ‘I forget people when I no longer
see them’, in order to get her to see me as often as possible, ‘I have
decided to leave you’, in order to pre-empt any idea of separation, now
it was because I desperately wanted her to return before a week had
elapsed that I said ‘Farewell’ to her, ‘for ever’; it was because I
wanted to see her again that I told her: ‘I would find it dangerous to
see you again’; it was because living apart from her seemed worse than
death that I wrote to her saying, ‘You were right, we would be unhappy
together’. Alas, this bogus letter, which I wrote so as to seem detached
from her (the last shred of pride left over from my former love for
Gilberte that survived in my love for Albertine) and also for the
sweetness of saying certain things which could move only me, and not
her, I ought to have guessed in advance that this might possibly provoke
a negative response, that is, one confirming the truth of my words; that
it was even quite probable that it would, for even had Albertine been
less intelligent than she was, she would not have doubted for an instant
that what I was saying was false. Even without lingering over my
declared intentions in writing this letter, the simple fact that I was
writing it, even if it had not followed Saint-Loup’s intervention, was
sufficient to prove to her that I wanted her to return and to imply that
she should allow me to swallow the hook even deeper, then, having
foreseen the possibility of a negative response, I should always have
foreseen that this response would renew my love for Albertine more
intensely than ever. And, even before sending my letter, I should have
stopped to wonder whether, if Albertine were to answer in the same
spirit and did not wish to return, I would be able to master my pain
enough to force myself to stay silent, rather than telegraph her to say,
‘Return’ or send her yet another emissary, which, after writing to say
that we would not see each other again, would be to give her detailed
proof that I was unable to do without her and might lead her to refuse
all the more strenuously to meet, which would then lead me, driven by my
inability to contain my anguish, to go out to see her, without her even
greeting me, as like as not. And no doubt, following three enormous
blunders, this would have been the worst of all, after which my last
resort would have been to kill myself on her doorstep. But the
disastrous way in which the psychopathological universe is constructed
implies that the clumsy act, the act which we should avoid at all costs,
is precisely the act which soothes us, the act which, until we discover
its outcome, opens up new prospects of hope for us and momentarily
relieves us of the intolerable pain that rejection gave birth to within
us, thus it is that when the pain is too strong, we fall into the clumsy
error of writing to the person whom we love, or begging someone else to
do so, or going to see her, and proving that we cannot do without her.

But I predicted none of this. The likely result of my letter seemed to
me on the contrary to be to make Albertine return as soon as possible.
So, since I was thinking of this outcome I felt greatly soothed as I
wrote the letter. But at the same time I had not ceased to weep while I
was writing it; at first rather in the same way as the day when I had
faked a separation, because the words rendered present to me the idea
that they expressed, although they aimed to produce the opposite effect
(uttering their lies out of pride in order to avoid admitting that I
loved her), they were charged with sadness, but I did also feel that
there was some truth in the idea.

Since the effect of this letter seemed certain to me, I regretted having
sent it. For in imagining Albertine’s return as ultimately so simple,
suddenly all the reasons that had made our marriage seem wrong for me
returned in full strength. I hoped that she would refuse to return. I
was starting to calculate how much my freedom and my whole future life
hung on her refusal; how crazy I had been to write; how I should have
retrieved my letter (alas, now sent), when Françoise brought it back to
me, along with the newspaper which she was bringing upstairs. She was
unsure how many stamps my letter required. But I immediately changed my
mind; I did not want Albertine to return, however, in order to alleviate
my anxiety, I wanted this to be her own decision, and so I decided to
give the letter back to Françoise. I opened the newspaper. It announced
the death of La Berma. Then I remembered the two different ways in which
I had listened to _Phèdre_, but now there was a third way for me to
think of the declaration scene. It seemed to me that what I had so often
recited to myself and what I had listened to in the theatre, was the
expression of laws that I would come to experience in my own life. There
are in our soul things which are dearer to us than we realize. Or else,
if we do yearn for them, it is because from day to day, for fear of
failure or suffering, we delay taking full possession of them. That is
what happened to me in the case of Gilberte, when I had thought that I
could do without her. If, before the moment when we are entirely
detached from these things, which occurs long after the moment when we
first believe ourselves detached, if for instance the young lady gets
engaged, we become insane and we find that we can no longer bear our
life, which seemed so monotonous and calm. Or if the object of our
desire is in our possession, we believe that she is a burden to us, that
we would gladly be rid of her; which is what had happened to me in the
case of Albertine. But just let the indifferent object be removed by her
departure, and we can no longer live. Now did not the ‘argument’ of
_Phèdre_ combine the two cases? Hippolyte is about to leave. Phèdre, who
until then has taken care to court his hostility, from moral duty, so
she says, or rather, as the poet makes her say, because she does not
believe that she could succeed, and because she does not feel loved, and
can now hold out no longer. She comes to him to admit her love, and this
is the scene that I had so often recited to myself:

On dit qu’un prompt départ vous éloigne de nous.¹⁰

Doubtless this reason for the departure of Hippolyte is incidental, we
might think, compared with that of the death of Theseus. And even when,
a few lines later, Phèdre pretends for a moment to have been
misunderstood:

… Aurais-je perdu tout le soin de ma gloire,¹¹

we might suppose that it is because Hippolyte has rejected her
declaration:

Madame, oubliez-vous

Que Thésée est mon père, et qu’il est votre époux?¹²

But even had he not had this indignant reaction, and had Phèdre seen
happiness within her grasp, she might still have felt that it was of
little worth. But as soon as she sees that it escapes her, that
Hippolyte thinks that he has misunderstood her and makes his excuses,
then, just as I did the moment after handing my letter to Françoise, she
wants the rejection to come from him, she wants to try one last chance:

Ah cruel, tu m’as trop entendue!¹³

And even Swann’s harshness towards Odette, of which I had heard tell, or
mine towards Albertine, a harshness which substitutes for the former
love a new one, composed of pity, tenderness and a need to find
expression for emotion, and which is only a variant of the former love,
even these can be also be found in this scene:

Tu me haïssais plus, je ne t’aimais pas moins.

Tes malheurs te prêtait encor de nouveaux charmes.¹⁴

The proof that ‘care for her good name’ is not what Phèdre holds most
dear is that she would forgive Hippolyte and would turn her back on
Oenone’s good counsel, if she did not learn at this moment that
Hippolyte was in love with Aricie. For jealousy, which in love is
tantamount to the loss of all happiness, touches us so much more than
the loss of reputation. Then it is that she lets Oenone (who is only a
name for her baser self) slander Hippolyte without taking ‘care to
defend him’ and thus sends the man who refuses to love her to a fate
which, however calamitous, still offers her no consolation, since her
own, self-inflicted death follows swiftly on from that of Hippolyte.
This, minimizing the share of all the ‘Jansenist’ scruples,¹⁵ as
Bergotte would have called them, which Racine has allocated to Phèdre in
order to make her seem less guilty, is at any rate how this scene
appeared to me, almost as a prophecy of the kind of love-scenes that I
would come to enact in my own lifetime. None the less, these reflections
had not altered my determination in the slightest, and I held out the
letter to Françoise for her to take it finally to the post, so as to
have made this approach towards Albertine, which seemed indispensable to
me the minute I heard that it had not been accomplished. And we are
doubtless wrong to believe that fulfilling our desires is of little
account, since as soon as we believe it possible for them not to be
fulfilled, we need them once more, and it is only when we are quite
certain that they cannot escape us that we feel that they are not worth
pursuing. And, in a way, we are not wrong. For if this attainment of our
desires and our happiness seem trivial only when they are secure, they
none the less contain unstable elements from which nothing but sorrow
can emerge. And the more completely our desires have been realized and
the longer the happiness has been prolonged, against the laws of nature,
and has been consecrated by habit, the stronger the sorrow, the more
impossible to bear. In another sense too, the two tendencies, in this
case the one which made me want my letter to be sent and, when I thought
that it had been, to regret this, are both true in their way. As for the
first tendency, it is only too easy to understand that we should pursue
our happiness – or our unhappiness – while hoping at the same time,
through the consequences of this new action as they start to unfold, to
maintain expectations that will not leave us in total despair, in a
word, which might manage to transform the misfortune which afflicts us
into other forms that we imagine we must find less cruel. But the other
tendency is no less important, for, born of our belief in the success of
our enterprise, it is quite simply a beginning, the anticipated
beginning of the disillusionment that we should soon experience if faced
with the satisfaction of our desires, our regret at having settled on
this form of happiness at the expense of excluding others. I handed the
letter back to Françoise, telling her to take it quickly to the
post-office. As soon as my letter had left, I again envisaged
Albertine’s return as imminent. This brought into my mind a constant
stream of graceful images, whose sweetness could not help neutralize the
dangers that I saw in this return. I was intoxicated by the prospect of
recovering the long-lost sweetness of having her by my side.

Time passes, and gradually all the things which we have falsely alleged
come true, an experience which had affected me only too strongly with
Gilberte; the indifference that I had feigned while I sobbed day and
night had come to exist; gradually, as I told Gilberte in a mendacious
dictum which had retrospectively come true, life had driven us apart. I
remembered this and thought: ‘If Albertine waits for a few months, my
lies will come true. And now that the worst is over, would it not be in
her best interest to allow that moment to pass? If she returns, I shall
have to renounce my true life, which I admit that I was not yet able to
enjoy, but which could gradually start to become more attractive as the
memory of Albertine becomes gradually weaker.’ I cannot claim that the
process of forgetting was not already at work. But one of the effects of
forgetting was precisely to make many of the unpleasant sides to
Albertine’s character and the hours of boredom that I had endured at her
side, no longer figure in my memory and thus cease to be reasons for me
to wish that she were no longer there, as I had done while she was still
with me, and to give me a summary image of her, embellished with all the
love that I had felt for other women. In this particular guise,
forgetting, although still working within me to accustom me to our
separation, only made me see Albertine as sweeter and more beautiful
than ever, and made me desire her return all the more.

On many occasions after Albertine’s departure, whenever it seemed to me
that I would not look as if I had been crying, I rang for Françoise and
said: ‘We ought to make sure that Mademoiselle Albertine has not left
anything behind. Don’t forget to clean her room so that everything is
ready for her when she returns.’ Or simply: ‘Actually, it was only the
other day, I suppose it must have been the day before she left, that
Mademoiselle Albertine was talking to me about …’ I wanted to curtail
the odious relish that Françoise took in Albertine’s absence, by making
her realize that it would be short-lived; I also wanted to show
Françoise that I had no qualms about discussing her departure and to
present it – as do certain generals who refer to their forced retreats
as ‘strategic withdrawals executed according to contingency plans’ – as
intended, as constituting an interlude whose true significance I was
momentarily dissimulating, but not at all as the end of my friendship
with Albertine. By constantly mentioning her, I hoped ultimately to
bring something of her back into the room, like a breath of fresh air,
since her departure had emptied the room and made it impossible to
breathe. And then again, we try to reduce the scale of our suffering by
bringing it into our everyday conversation between ordering a suit and
choosing the menu for dinner.

While she was tidying Albertine’s room, Françoise’s curiosity led her to
open the drawer of a little rosewood table where my friend used to place
the personal jewellery that she removed when she went to bed. ‘Oh,
Monsieur! Mademoiselle Albertine has forgotten to take her rings, she
has left them in the drawer.’ My first reaction was to say: ‘We must
send them on to her.’ But that would look as if I were not sure that she
would return. ‘Well,’ I replied after a moment’s silence, ‘it’s hardly
worth the trouble for the short time that she will be away. Give them to
me and. I’ll take care of it.’ Françoise handed them to me with some
reluctance. She detested Albertine, but she judged me by her own
standards and imagined that no one could hand me a letter written by my
friend without fearing that I would open it. I took the rings. ‘I hope
that Monsieur will be careful not to lose them,’ said Françoise, ‘just
look how beautiful they are! I don’t know who gave her them, whether it
was Monsieur or somebody else, but I know it must be somebody rich who
has good taste!’ – It wasn’t me, I replied, and besides the two did not
come from the same person, one was given her by her aunt and she bought
the other herself. – Not from the same person! Françoise cried, Monsieur
must be joking, they are identical, except for the ruby that they added
to one of them, there is the same eagle on both of them and the same
initials inside.’ I do not know whether Françoise was aware of the pain
that she was causing, but a smile started to creep over her face and
remained there. ‘What do you mean, the same eagle? You must be mad. On
the one without the ruby you’re right, there is an eagle, but on the
other one there’s an engraving of a sort of man’s head. – A man’s head?
Where did Monsieur see that? Even with my reading-glasses I saw straight
away that it was one of the eagle’s wings; if Monsieur will take his
magnifying glass, he will see the other wing on the other side and the
head and the beak in the middle. You can see every feather. Oh, what a
fine piece of work.’ My anxious need to know whether Albertine had lied
to me made me forget that I should have stood on my dignity in
Françoise’s company and denied her the cruel pleasure which she took, if
not in tormenting me, at least in denigrating my friend. I gasped as
Françoise went to fetch my magnifying glass, then I took it and asked
her to show me the eagle on the ruby ring; she had no trouble in helping
me to identify the wings, stylized in the same manner as on the other
ring, with the head and every feather picked out in relief. She also
pointed out similar insignia in the ruby ring, although in this case it
is true that they were accompanied by others. And inside both were
Albertine’s initials. ‘But I am amazed that Monsieur needed to take so
much trouble to see that they were the same ring,’ said Françoise. ‘Even
if you don’t look close up, you can see the same craftsmanship, the same
way of working the gold, the same shape. Just by looking at them I would
have sworn that they came from the same place. It stands out like a dish
by a good cook.’ And indeed, the curiosity of the servant, accustomed to
noting details with terrifying precision and spurred on by hatred,
joined forces, in this expert scrutiny, with her good taste, the same
taste in fact that she displayed in her cooking, and which was perhaps
whetted, as I had noticed in the style of her dress when we set out for
Balbec, by the coquetry of a woman who used to be pretty and who had
taken note of the dresses and jewellery of other women. If I had opened
the wrong medicine chest and if, instead of taking a few veronal tablets
one day when I felt that I had drunk too many cups of tea, I had taken
as many cups of coffee, my heart could not have beaten more violently. I
asked Françoise to leave the room. I wished that I could have seen
Albertine immediately. My revulsion at her falsehood and my jealousy of
someone unknown were augmented by my pain at learning that she had
accepted presents in this way. It is true that I had given her more, but
a woman whom we are keeping does not seem to us to be a kept woman as
long as we know that she is not being kept by anyone else. And yet since
I had never ceased to spend so much money on her, I kept her despite
this moral weakness; this weakness that I had allowed in her, perhaps
encouraged, possibly even created. And then, just as we have the ability
to tell ourselves stories in order to alleviate our pains, just as we
manage when we are dying of hunger to persuade ourselves that some
stranger is about to leave us a fortune of a hundred million francs, I
imagined Albertine in my arms, explaining to me in a word that she had
bought the second ring because of the similar design and that it was she
who had had the initials engraved. But this exploration was still
tender, it had not yet had time to put its salutary roots down into my
mind, and my pain was not to be so easily appeased. And I wondered how
many men who say that their mistresses are very kind suffer similar
torments and thus lie to others as well as themselves. Yet they do not
entirely lie; they do spend genuinely delicious hours with these women;
but all the tenderness that these women show their lovers in the
presence of their friends, to flatter their pride, and all the
tenderness that they reserve for their lovers in private, to allow
themselves to be worshipped, mask unknown hours where the lover has
suffered, doubted and searched endlessly, but in vain, to discover the
truth! Such suffering inevitably accompanies the sweetness of loving a
woman and delighting in even her most trivial remarks, while knowing
that they are trivial, as long as they are permeated with her scent. At
this moment I could no longer delight in breathing Albertine’s scent
through my memory. I sat downcast, holding the two rings in my hand,
looking at that pitiless eagle whose beak was tearing at my heart, whose
wings with their chiselled feathers had flown off with the confidence
that I still placed in my friend, and under whose claws my lacerated
mind could no longer for a moment escape the questions ceaselessly
raised about that stranger, whose name the eagle surely symbolized while
none the less refusing to allow me to read it, the woman whom she had
doubtless loved in the past and whom she had certainly seen again not so
long ago, since it was on that unspeakably sweet and intimate day which
we had spent walking in the Bois de Boulogne together that I had seen
for the first time the second ring, the one where the eagle looked as if
it was dipping its beak in the bright, bloody pool of the ruby.

Yet even if from morning to night I continually pined over Albertine’s
departure, this did not mean that I thought only of her. On the one hand
her charm had gradually permeated objects which finally became very
distant from her, but were none the less galvanized by the same emotions
as those she inspired in me, if something made me think of Incarville,
or the Verdurins, or Léa’s latest role, a wave of suffering flooded over
me. On the other hand, what I myself called ‘thinking of Albertine’ was
in fact thinking of ways of getting her to return, of meeting up with
her, of finding out what she was doing. So that if, during these hours
of unremitting torture, my suffering could have been displayed in
graphic form, it would have shown images of the Orsay railway station,¹⁶
the banknotes offered to Mme Bontemps, Saint-Loup leaning over a
post-office counter filling in a form to send me a telegram, but never a
picture of Albertine. In the same way that during the course of our
lives we, in our egoism, constantly see before our eyes the goals which
our selves find valuable, but do not perceive the ‘I’ itself which never
ceases to scrutinize them, so the desire that directs our actions swoops
down upon them, but never looks back on itself, either because it is too
utilitarian and, spurning knowledge, prefers to rush into action, or
because we search out the future in order to compensate for the
disappointments of the present, or even because the indolence of the
mind tempts it to slide down the slippery slope of the imagination
rather than to climb the steep slope of introspection. In fact in the
moments of crisis when we are prepared to stake our very life, as the
person on whom it depends reveals the increasingly vast place that she
takes up for us, leaving nothing in our world undisturbed by her
presence, proportionally the image of this person decreases until it is
no longer perceptible. We feel the impact of her presence all around us
through the emotions that we feel; but the cause, the person herself, is
nowhere to be found. During those days I was so unable to call
Albertine’s image to mind that I might almost have thought that I did
not love her, just as my mother, in those moments of despair when she
found herself totally incapable of picturing my grandmother (except on
one occasion in a random encounter in a dream which made such an
impression on her that, although she was asleep, she forced herself,
with the little strength left to her in her sleep, to make it last),
might have reproached herself and did in fact reproach herself with not
missing her mother, whose dream had struck her a mortal blow, but whose
features eluded her memory.

Why might I have believed that Albertine was not attracted to women?
Because, especially in recent times, she had said that she was not
attracted to them; but was not the life we lived together based on a
perpetual lie? Never once had she said to me, ‘Why am I not free to go
out as I wish? Why do you ask other people what I do?’ But our life was
in fact too singular for her not to have asked if she had not understood
the reason. And was it not understandable that my silence over the
causes of her sequestration should be countered by an equally inflexible
silence over her perpetual desires and countless memories, her countless
desires and expectations? Françoise looked as if she knew that I was
lying when I referred to Albertine’s imminent return. And her belief
seemed founded on rather more than the truth which usually guided our
servant, that is, the fact that masters do not like to be humiliated in
front of their servants and reveal to them only that part of reality
which does not deviate too far from a flattering fiction, liable to
maintain respect. On this occasion, Françoise’s belief seemed to be
founded on something else, as if she herself had awakened and fuelled
the suspicions in Albertine’s mind, and fanned her anger, in short as if
she had driven her to an extremity where she could tell that her
departure was inevitable. If this was true, my version of a temporary
absence, known and approved by me, could have been met only with
incredulity by Françoise. But her notion of Albertine’s self-interested
nature, which, inflamed by her hatred, caused her to magnify the
‘profit’ that Albertine was supposedly extracting from me, could to some
extent cause her to doubt her convictions. Thus when in her presence I
alluded to Albertine’s imminent return as something wholly natural,
Françoise looked into my eyes (in the same way as, when the butler
teased her by reading out a piece of political news that she was
reluctant to believe, altering the words so as to say, for example, they
were going to close down the churches and banish the clergy,¹⁷
Françoise, even from the depths of her kitchen, and despite not being
able to read, instinctively and eagerly looked at the newspaper), as if
she were able to see whether it was really written there or whether I
had made it up.

But when Françoise saw me write a long letter and then check the right
address for Mme Bontemps, her previously rather vague terror that
Albertine might return welled up more strongly than ever within her. It
reached a point of veritable consternation when she was obliged one
morning to hand me among others a letter where she had recognized
Albertine’s handwriting on the envelope. She wondered whether
Albertine’s departure had not been purely theatrical, a supposition
which she found doubly upsetting, in that it ensured Albertine’s
presence in the house permanently for the future and in that it
constituted for me, that is, in so far as I was Françoise’s master, for
Françoise herself the humiliation of having been manipulated by
Albertine. However impatient I was to read Albertine’s letter, I could
not help momentarily studying Françoise’s eyes, drained of all hope as
they read in this augury the imminent return of Albertine, just as a
devotee of winter sports concludes joyfully that winter is nigh when he
sees the swallows depart. At last Françoise left, and when I had made
sure that she had closed the door, I opened her letter silently, so as
not to seem anxious, reading as follows:

‘_My dear friend, thank you for all your kind remarks, I am at your
disposal and shall cancel the order for the Rolls if you think that I
may be of assistance, and I do think this likely. You have only to tell
me the name of your agent. You would be liable to let yourself be taken
in by these people who have only one thing in mind, which is to make a
sale; and what would you do with a car, since you never go out? I am
very touched that you should have kept such a nice memory of our last
outing. Please believe that for my part I shall never forget this
excursion and its twofold twilight (since night was falling and we were
destined to part) and that it will never be erased from my mind until
blackest night finally invades it_.’

I felt confident that this last sentence was purely rhetorical and that
Albertine could not have kept until her dying day such a sweet memory of
an outing which had certainly given her no pleasure, since she had been
impatient to leave me. But I also admired the talent of the cyclist and
golfer from Balbec, who before making my acquaintance had read nothing
by Racine apart from _Esther_,¹⁸ and I realized how right I had been to
feel that she had been enriched during her stay with me by new
qualities, which had changed her and made her more complete. And thus,
the words which I had uttered in Balbec, ‘I think that my friendship
would be valuable for you, that I am just the person who could provide
you with what you lack’ – I had written as a dedication to her on a
photograph: _Certain to be providential_, – words which I spoke without
believing them, only in order to persuade her that frequenting me would
be profitable and to minimize the tedium that this might provoke, these
words too turned out to be true; as, in fact, did my admission to her
that I did not want to see her for fear of falling in love with her. I
had said this because, on the contrary, I knew that with constant
meeting my love tended to fade and that separation excited it; but in
fact the constant meeting had given birth to a need for her infinitely
stronger than that first love in Balbec.

But in the end Albertine’s letter was unhelpful. She spoke only of
writing to the agent. I must extricate myself from this situation and
precipitate matters. I had the following idea. I immediately had a
letter sent to Andrée telling her that Albertine was staying with her
aunt, that I felt very lonely and that she would do me the greatest
favour if she could come and take up residence with me for a few days
but that, since I did not want to act behind Albertine’s back, I begged
her to let Albertine know. And at the same time I wrote to Albertine, as
if I had not yet received her letter:

_‘My dear friend, forgive me for something you will understand very
well, which is that I so detest acting behind people’s backs that I
wanted you to be alerted by me as well as by her. Having had the
experience of your sweet presence by my side, I have got into the bad
habit of not living alone. Since we have decided that you would not
return, I thought that the person who would best take your place,
because_ _she would change my life least, and would most remind me of
you, was Andrée, and I have asked her to come. So that this should not
seem too sudden, I have spoken to her of a period of just a few days,
but between you and me I think that this time it is something permanent.
Do you not think that I am right? You know_ _that your little group of
girls at Balbec has always been the social group that has exerted the
most influence over me, the one with which I was most pleased to be
associated when allowed. There is no doubt that I still feel its
prestige. Since our fatal characters and life’s misfortunes have
determined that my little Albertine could not be my wife, I believe that
I should none the less take a wife – one less charming, but one whose
greater compatibility of character ought perhaps to allow her to be
happier with me – in Andrée.’_

But once I had sent this letter, I was suddenly assailed by the
suspicion that, Albertine having written, ‘I would have been only too
happy to return if you had written to me direct,’ she had said this only
because I had not written to her direct and that, if I had done so, she
still would not have returned, that she would have been pleased to know
that Andrée was living with me and was to become my wife, provided that
she, Albertine, remained free, because for a week now, foiling all the
precautions that I had taken hour by hour for more than six months, she
was able to give free rein to her vices and do every minute of the day
what I had been preventing her from doing. I thought that she was
probably applying her freedom out there to dubious ends, and no doubt
this idea as I formulated it made me sad, but it remained vague, since
it pictured nothing specific, and through the indefinite number of women
that she had led me to imagine might be her lovers, without letting me
dwell on any one in particular, it threw my mind into a sort of
perpetual motion which did cause me pain, but a pain which, for lack of
any concrete image, was bearable. But it ceased to be so and became
atrocious when Saint-Loup returned. Before saying why the words that he
uttered made me so unhappy, I must relate an incident which occurred
immediately before his visit and whose memory so disturbed me that it
diluted, if not the painful impression that I gained from my
conversation with Saint-Loup, at least the practical impact of this
conversation. This incident was the following. Burning with impatience
to see Saint-Loup, I was waiting for him on the staircase (which I could
not have done if my mother had been in the house, for that, apart from
‘talking out of the window’, was what she hated most of all), when I
heard the following words: ‘What do you mean! If there is someone you
don’t like can’t you get him dismissed? It’s not so difficult. All you
have to do, for instance, is hide the things that they will ask him to
fetch; then, just when his masters are in a hurry and call for him, he
won’t be able to find a thing, he’ll lose his grip: my aunt will be
furious with him and ask you: “Whatever can he be doing?” When he does
arrive, he’ll be late, everyone will be furious and he won’t have
brought what they’d asked for. By the fourth or fifth occasion you can
be sure that he will be dismissed, especially if you take care on the
sly to make the clean things that he was supposed to fetch dirty, and
thousands of tricks like that.’ I was struck dumb with stupefaction, for
these cruel, Machiavellian words were uttered by the voice of
Saint-Loup. Since until then I had always considered him to be someone
so fundamentally kind, so sympathetic towards those who suffer, it had
the same effect on me as if I had heard him reciting the part of Satan
in a play; that is, he could not be speaking in his own name. ‘But
surely everyone should be allowed to earn his living,’ replied the other
man, whom I then saw and identified as one of the Duchesse de
Guermantes’s footmen. ‘Why should you care a damn as long as you are all
right?’ Saint-Loup replied wickedly. ‘You’ll have the added pleasure of
having a scapegoat. You can feel free to spill entire ink-wells over his
livery just when he is preparing to serve at an important dinner, in
short, never leave him in peace for a second, until he prefers to leave
of his own accord. As for me, by the way, I’ll put my shoulder to the
wheel, I’ll tell my aunt that I admire your patience in serving
alongside such a clumsy, uncouth individual.’ I announced my presence,
and Saint-Loup welcomed me, but my confidence in him was shaken since I
had heard him sound such a different man from the one I knew. And I
wondered if someone who was capable of acting so cruelly towards a
hapless wretch might not have acted treacherously towards me in his
mission to Mme Bontemps. This reflection served above all, once he had
left me, to help me avoid considering his failure as proof that I could
not succeed. But while he was by my side, I had thoughts only for the
Saint-Loup of old and above all for the friend who had just left Mme
Bontemps, as I thought. He said to me straight away: ‘You think that I
should have telephoned you more often, but they kept telling me you were
engaged.’ Yet my suffering became unbearable when he said: ‘To carry on
from where my last despatch left off, I went through a kind of outhouse
which led into the house, and they took me down a long corridor into the
lounge.’ On hearing these words – outhouse, corridor, lounge – and even
before he had finished uttering them, my heart was wracked by spasms
even more immediately than if it had been connected to an electric
current, for the power that can circle the globe the most times per
second is not so much electricity as pain. How I repeated these words,
outhouse, corridor, lounge, renewing their shock at my leisure, when
Saint-Loup had left. In an outhouse, you can hide with a girl-friend.
And in that lounge, who knows what Albertine did when her aunt was not
there? And yet, had I imagined the house where Albertine was living as
able to include neither outhouse nor lounge? No, I had not imagined the
house at all, or merely as a vague location. I had suffered first of all
when the place where she was staying had become geographically specified
for the first time, when I had learned that instead of being in one of
two or three possible places she was in Touraine; the words spoken by
her concierge had marked out in my heart as on a map the place where I
would finally have to suffer. But even when I had got used to the idea
that she was in a house in Touraine, I still had not seen the house;
never could I have conceived the frightful idea of a lounge, an outhouse
and a corridor, which I now saw staring out at me from Saint-Loup’s
retina, which had seen them, and appearing in the guise of the rooms
which Albertine walked into, passed through and lived in; these specific
rooms and not an infinity of other possible rooms which had neutralized
one another. In the words outhouse, corridor and lounge, I perceived my
folly in having left Albertine for a week in this accursed place, whose
existence (rather than its simple possibility) had just been revealed to
me. Alas! when Saint-Loup told me in addition that while in this lounge
he had heard someone singing at the top of her voice in the next room,
and that it was Albertine who was singing, I realized with despair that,
once rid of me, she was happy! She had regained her freedom. And all the
while I had been thinking that she would come back and take Andrée’s
place! My pain turned into anger with Saint-Loup. ‘Letting her know that
you were coming is precisely what I asked you to avoid. – How easy do
you think that was! They promised me she wasn’t there. Oh, I know you’re
annoyed with me, I could tell from your telegrams. But you are not being
fair, I did what I could.’ Set free once more, released once again from
the cage where I had kept her for days on end without letting her come
into my room, she had assumed in my eyes all her old value, she had
become once again the object of everyone’s pursuit, the wondrous bird of
the earliest days. ‘Look, to sum up. As for the money, I don’t know what
to say, the woman I spoke to seemed so discreet that I was afraid of
offending her. But then she didn’t even raise an eyebrow when I did
mention money. And a little later she even told me that she was touched
to see how well we understood each other. Yet everything she said
subsequently was so discreet, so refined, that I found it impossible to
believe that she could be talking about the money I was offering when
she said: “We understand each other so well,” for basically I was acting
like a cad. – But perhaps she didn’t understand; perhaps she didn’t hear
what you said; you should have repeated it, for it’s surely the money
that would have made everything work out. – But how can you imagine that
she couldn’t have heard me? I was talking to her as I’m talking to you
now, and she is neither deaf nor mad. – And didn’t she pass any remark
at all? – Not one. – You could have repeated it, at least once. – How
could I have repeated it? As soon as I went in I saw what she looked
like, and I thought that you had been mistaken, that you were making me
put my foot in it and that it was terribly difficult to just offer her
money like that. Yet I still went ahead, in order to follow your orders,
but convinced that she would have me thrown out. – But she didn’t.
Therefore either she hadn’t heard what you’d said and you needed to
repeat it, or you could have pursued the matter. – It’s all very well
for you to say: “she hadn’t heard what you said” because you are here
with me, but, let me say it again, if you had been there and listening
to our conversation, there was no interruption, I said it quite bluntly,
it was impossible for her not to understand. – But was she at least
convinced that I have always wanted to marry her niece? – No, if you
want my opinion on that, she didn’t believe for one moment that you had
the slightest intention of marrying her. She told me that you had told
her niece yourself that you wanted to leave her. I don’t know if she is
convinced even now that you do intend to get married.’ This reassured me
somewhat, by making me feel that I appeared less humiliated, therefore
more liable still to be loved, and freer to take some decisive steps.
And yet I felt tormented. ‘I’m so sorry, I can see that you are not
pleased,’ said Saint-Loup. ‘Oh no, I am touched by your kindness and I
am grateful, but it seems to me that you might have … – I did my best.
Nobody else could have done more, or even as much. Try someone else. –
But, how can I? If I had known, I wouldn’t have sent you, but now that
your approach has failed, it prevents me from trying again.’ I
reproached him again with trying to help me and failing. As he was
leaving, Saint-Loup had met some young ladies on their way into the
house. I had often previously suspected that she knew other girls in the
region, but this was the first time that it tormented me so. We really
have to suppose that nature has enabled our minds to secrete a natural
antidote which cancels out the suppositions which we ceaselessly
formulate and makes them harmless; but nothing could immunize me against
the girls whom Saint-Loup had encountered. And yet were not all these
details precisely what I had sought to glean from everyone about
Albertine? Was it not I myself who, in order to know them more fully,
had asked Saint-Loup, when he had been summoned to his Colonel’s side,
to come to see me at whatever cost? Was it not I who had sought out
these details, or rather my ravenous pain, greedy to feed on them to
give itself substance? Finally Saint-Loup told me that he had been
pleasantly surprised to meet the only person in the vicinity whom he
knew, a pretty actress who was on holiday nearby, a former friend of
Rachel’s, who had revived memories for him. And this actress’s name was
enough for me to think, ‘Perhaps she was the one’; enough to make me see
Albertine flushed and smiling with pleasure, held in the arms of a woman
whom I did not know. And in fact why should that not have been the case?
Had I ever deprived myself of thinking about other women since I knew
Albertine? The evening when I had been to the Princesse de Guermantes
for the first time, when I had returned home, was I not thinking much
less about the latter than about the young lady who, according to
Saint-Loup, frequented houses of ill-fame, and about Mme Putbus’s
chambermaid? Was it not for the latter that I had returned to Balbec?
More recently, I had been very tempted to go to Venice, so why should
Albertine not have been tempted to go to Touraine? Except that, deep
down, as I now realized, I would not have left her, I would not have
gone to Venice. And even, just as I was thinking, ‘I shall leave her
soon,’ I knew in the depths of my heart that I would never leave her,
just as I knew that I would never get down to work again, nor lead a
healthy life, nor any of the things that I promised myself each day I
would do the next. Only, whatever I might believe deep down, I had
thought that I was behaving more cleverly by letting her live under the
threat of perpetual separation. And doubtless my wretched cleverness had
been all too convincing. In any case things could not continue in this
way, I could not leave her in Touraine with those girls, with that
actress; I could not bear the thought of the life that was slipping away
from me. I would await her reply to my letter: if she was doing wrong,
alas! one day more or less would make no difference (and perhaps I
thought this because, having lost the habit of requiring an account of
every minute of her life, a single one of which leaving her free would
have driven me mad, my jealousy no longer observed the same time-scale).
But as soon as I had received her reply, if it said she did not intend
to return, I would go to fetch her back; I would tear her away from her
girl-friends by consent or by force. Besides, would it not be better for
me to go there myself, now that I had discovered Saint-Loup’s previously
unsuspected malice? Who could tell whether he might not have devised a
whole conspiracy to keep me away from Albertine? Was it because I had
changed, was it because until then I had not been able to suppose that
natural causes would one day lead me into such an extraordinary
situation, how I would have lied if I had written to her now what I had
said to her in Paris, that I hoped no accident would befall her? Oh, if
one might have occurred, my life, instead of being for ever poisoned by
this ceaseless jealousy, would immediately have recovered, if not
happiness, at least the peace bestowed by the suppression of suffering.

‘Suppression of suffering’? Could I really have believed it, believed
that death erases only what exists and leaves everything else in the
state it was before, that it removes the pain from the heart of the man
for whom the existence of his partner is no longer anything but a cause
of pain, that it removes the pain and leaves nothing in its place?
Suppression of pain! As I browsed through the news items in the papers,
I regretted not having been brave enough to formulate the same wish as
Swann. If Albertine could have fallen victim to an accident and had
lived, I would have had an excuse to rush to her bedside; if she had
died, I would have recovered what Swann called the freedom to live. Did
I believe this? Swann, who was so refined and thought he knew himself so
well, had believed it. How little we know of what lies in our hearts!
How well I could have taught him a little later, had be still been
alive, that his wish was as absurd as it was criminal and that the death
of the woman he loved would have liberated him from nothing!

I abandoned all pride concerning Albertine, I sent her a desperate
telegram asking her to return on any terms, saying that she would be
able to do whatever she liked, that I would ask only to kiss her for a
minute before bedtime three times a week. And had she said ‘Only once a
week’, I would have accepted that ‘once’. She never returned. My
telegram had barely been sent when another arrived for me. It was from
Mme Bontemps. The world is not given to each individual in advance.
During the course of a lifetime things that we could never have guessed
are added in. Ah! It was not suppression of suffering that the first two
lines of the telegram produced in me: ‘My poor friend, our little
Albertine is no more, forgive me for having to tell you this terrible
thing, knowing that you loved her so much. She was thrown against a tree
by her horse while out riding. We did everything we could, but could not
revive her. Would that I had died in her place!’ No, not the suppression
of suffering, but a previously unknown kind of suffering, that of
learning that she would not return. But had I not told myself several
times that she might not return? I had indeed said this to myself, but I
now realized that I had never believed it for a moment. As I needed her
presence and her kisses to help to bear the pain caused by my
suspicions, I had acquired the habit, ever since Balbec, of being always
with her. Even when she was out of the house and I was on my own, I
would still be kissing her. I had continued to do so since she had left
for Touraine. I needed her fidelity less than her return. And if my
intellect could sometimes with impunity doubt this return, my
imagination did not cease for one minute to picture it. Instinctively I
stroked my neck and my lips, which had imagined themselves being kissed
by her since she had left, yet which would never be kissed by her again;
I stroked them as Mama had caressed me on my grandmother’s death, saying
to me, ‘My poor child, your grandmother who loved you so much will never
kiss you again.’ My whole future life had been torn out of my heart. My
future life? Had I then never on any occasion thought of living it
without Albertine? No, never. Had I not for so long dedicated to her
every minute of my life until my dying day? Of course I had! This future
inseparable from her was not something that I had been able to perceive,
but now that it had been cut loose I felt a gaping hole in the place
where it had been in my heart. Françoise, who as yet knew nothing, came
into my room; I shouted at her furiously, ‘What is it?’, then she said
to me (and there are sometimes words that place an alternative reality
in the same place as the one which we see before our eyes, making us
reel with dizziness), ‘There’s no need for Monsieur to look angry. On
the contrary, he is going to be very pleased. It’s two letters from
Mademoiselle Albertine.’ I realized afterwards that I must have had the
look of a man taking leave of his senses. I did not feel happy, nor even
incredulous. I was like a man who sees the same place in his room taken
up by a sofa and a grotto. Since nothing seems real any more, he
collapses to the floor. Albertine’s two letters must have been written
shortly before the ride where she had met her death. The first one said:
‘_My dear friend, many_ _thanks for showing your confidence in me by
telling me of your intention to invite Andrée into your home. I am sure
that she will accept with great pleasure and I think that she is very
lucky. Gifted as she is, she will make the most of the company of a man
like you and of the admirable influence that you are able to exert over
a fellow creature. I think that your proposal will bring as much benefit
to her as to you. So, should she show the slightest reticence (although
I do not think this likely), send me a telegram, and I_ _shall take her
in hand_.’ The second letter was dated a day later. In fact she must
have written them both within a few moments of each other and then
pre-dated the first. For all the while I had been absurdly
misinterpreting her intentions, which had been merely to return to my
side, whereas someone with no stake in the affair, say a man of no
imagination, the negotiator of a peace treaty, or a businessman auditing
a transaction, would have judged better than I. The letter contained
only these words: ‘_Would it be too late for me to return to you? If
you_ _have not yet written to Andrée, would you agree to take me back? I
shall be bound by your decision, which I beg you to let me know without
delay, since you can imagine how impatiently I await it. If it were
favourable, I would take the next train. Yours with all my heart,
Albertine.’_

For Albertine’s death to have suppressed my suffering, the mortal blow
would have had to kill her not only in Touraine, but within me. There,
she had never been more alive. To enter inside us, people have been
obliged to take on the form and to fit into the framework of time;
appearing to us only in successive instants, they have never managed to
reveal to us more than one aspect, print more than a single photograph
of themselves at a time. This is no doubt a great weakness in human
beings, to consist in a simple collection of moments; yet a great
strength too; they depend on memory, and our memory of a moment is not
informed of everything that has happened since, the moment which it
registered still lives on and, with it, the person whose form was
sketched within it. And then this fragmentation not only makes the dead
person live on, it multiplies her forms. In order to console myself, I
would have had to forget not one but innumerable Albertines. When I had
succeeded in accepting the grief of having lost one of them, I would
have to begin again with another, with a hundred others.

So then my life was entirely changed. What had constituted its sweetness
was not Albertine in person, but, in parallel with her, when I was
alone, the perpetual rebirth of moments from the past called forth by
identical moments. The sound of the rain brought back to me the scent of
lilac in Combray; the sun’s rays moving over the balcony brought the
pigeons from the Champs-Elysées; the sounds muffled by the morning heat
brought the coolness of cherries; the yearning for Brittany or Venice
was borne by the sound of the wind and the return of Easter. Summer was
on its way, the days grew longer. It was the season when pupils and
teachers leave before mid-morning to go to the public gardens to prepare
for their final examinations under the trees, to catch the last drop of
coolness falling from a sky less burning than in the heat of the day,
but already arid and bare. From my darkened room, with a force of
evocation which equalled that of former times but now brought only
suffering, I sensed that the sun hung heavy in the air outside as it
set, garishly daubing the verticals of houses and churches. And if
Françoise on her return were accidentally to ruffle the folds of the
lined curtains, I would smother a cry escaping from the inner wound that
had just been reopened by the sliver of antique sunlight which had made
the modern façade of Bricqueville l’Orgueilleuse seem beautiful, when
Albertine had said, ‘It has been restored.’ Not knowing how to explain
my sighs to Françoise, I said, ‘Oh, I am so thirsty.’ She went out and
then returned, but I had to turn away abruptly, assailed by the painful
charge of one of those thousands of invisible memories which erupted in
the shadows around me at every moment: I had just noticed that she had
brought me cider and cherries, the cider and cherries which a farm lad
had brought out to us in the car at Balbec, those substances which in
former days would have enabled me to commune in perfect harmony with the
rainbow filtering through shady dining-rooms on torrid days. Then for
the first time I thought back to the farm at Les Écorres, and I thought
that on certain days at Balbec when Albertine told me that she was not
free because she had to go out with her aunt, she was perhaps with one
or other of her girl-friends on a farm with which she knew that I was
not familiar and where, while I was waiting around at the
Marie-Antoinette farm¹⁹ on the off-chance of a meeting only to be told,
‘We have not seen her today,’ she treated her friend to the same words
that she had spoken to me when we had been for a drive together: ‘He
will never think of looking for us here, so we will not be disturbed.’ I
asked Françoise to draw the curtains to save me from seeing the ray of
sunlight. But it continued to infiltrate my memory just as corrosively.
‘I don’t like it, it has been restored, but tomorrow we will go to
Saint-Martin-le-Vêtu, and the day after to …’ Tomorrow, the day after,
it was a future life that we would share together, perhaps for ever,
that was starting to take shape; my heart leapt out towards it, but it
was no longer there, Albertine was dead.

I asked Françoise what time it was. Six o’clock. At last, thank God, the
oppressive heat that Albertine and I used to so complain about, and so
enjoy, was going to disappear. The day was drawing to a close. But what
benefit did this bring me? The coolness of evening set in, the sun went
down; in my memory, at the end of the road along which we were driving
home together, I noticed, beyond the last village, something that looked
like another resort in the distance, but too far to reach the same
evening, so that we would stop in Balbec and stay there together.
Together then. But now, alone, I had to pull up short before this same
abyss, she was dead. It was no longer enough to draw the curtains, I
tried to plug the eyes and ears of my memory, so as not to see this
orange-tinted strip of sunset, so as not to hear those invisible birds
who called to each other from tree to tree. All around me while I was
being so tenderly kissed by the girl who now lay dead, I tried to avoid
the sensations invoked by the dampness of leaves at evening, the
switchback rise and fall of roads. But already these sensations had
taken hold of me again, borne me quite far from the present moment,
allowing the idea that Albertine was dead to fall back far enough to
gather all the more momentum before it returned to strike me again. Oh,
I would never again enter a forest and walk beneath the trees. But would
the open plains be any less cruel to me? How often in order to fetch
Albertine, or returning with her, had I crossed the open plain of
Criqueville, sometimes in misty weather when the waves of fog gave us
the impression of being surrounded by a vast lake, sometimes on limpid
nights when the moonlight, draining the earth of matter and making it
seem celestial just two feet away whereas in daylight it does so only at
a distance, subsumed the fields and the woods into the heavens and
sealed the whole in a single block of blue chalcedony! Françoise must
have been pleased that Albertine was dead, and to be fair I must
acknowledge that from a kind of decorum and tact she did not pretend to
be sad. But the unwritten rules of her ancient code of law and the
tradition of the medieval peasant weeping over tales of chivalry were
deeper rooted than her hatred of Albertine or even Eulalie. Thus on one
of those late afternoons, when I was too slow to hide my suffering, she
noticed my tears, aided by her experience on a farm as a little girl who
had been used to capturing animals and making them suffer, experiencing
pure joy in strangling chickens and boiling lobsters alive, and when I
was ill, in observing my sick complexion, as if I were an owl she had
injured, and then commenting on it in lugubrious tones, as if it were a
harbinger of doom. But her practice of the ‘common law’ of Combray would
not allow her to take tears and grief lightly; she judged them as
sinister as removing one’s flannel vest or picking at one’s food. ‘Oh,
no, Monsieur, you mustn’t cry like that, you’ll make yourself ill!’ And
in wanting to stop my tears she looked as worried as if they had been
streams of blood. Unfortunately for her I adopted a cold expression
which cut short her intended, but perhaps none the less sincere,
effusions. She probably felt the same about Albertine as she had about
Eulalie, and now that my friend could no longer derive any profit from
me, Françoise no longer hated her. She was determined to show me,
however, that she was well aware that I was crying and that, simply
following my family’s morbid habit, I did not want to ‘let people see’.
‘You mustn’t cry, Monsieur,’ she said, in calmer tones this time, rather
to show me her insight than to display any pity. And she added: ‘It was
bound to happen, she was too happy, poor thing, she didn’t know how
happy she was.’

How long it takes the day to die on these never-ending summer evenings!
The pale ghost of the house opposite continued for ever painting the sky
with its persistent white water-colour. At last night fell inside the
apartment, I stumbled into the furniture in the lobby, but, amid what I
had taken for total darkness, the glazed panel in the door to the
staircase shone translucent and blue, with the blue of a flower or an
insect’s wing, a blue that would have seemed beautiful to me if I had
not felt that with this parting reflection the relentlessly cruel
daylight dealt me a final thrust, as sharp as steel.

Complete darkness would, however, finally fall, but then I had only to
see a star beside the tree in the courtyard to remember leaving by car
after dinner for the woods of Chantepie, carpeted by moonlight. And even
in the streets, I might happen to focus and reflect upon the natural
purity of a beam of moonlight striking the back of a bench amid the
artificial lights of Paris, as it brought the city into the countryside
for a moment in my imagination, evoking the eternal silence of quiet
pastures and permeating Paris with the painful memory of the rides that
I had shared with Albertine. Would the night never end? But at the first
cool draught of dawn I shivered, for it had brought back to me the
softness of that summer when from Balbec to Incarville, from Incarville
to Balbec, we had so often accompanied one another home and back again
until the first light dawned. I had one single hope for the future, a
hope much more poignant than a fear – which was to forget Albertine. I
knew that I would forget her one day, I had after all forgotten
Gilberte, Mme de Guermantes, and even my grandmother. And our most just
and cruel punishment for the forgetting, as absolute and silent as that
of the grave, which detaches us from those whom we no longer love, is
that we should sense this same act of forgetting to be inevitable even
in respect of those whom we do still love. To tell the truth, we know
that it is a painless state, a state of indifference. But not being able
to link simultaneously what I was then and what I would become, I
thought in despair of this whole integument of kisses, caresses and
friendly slumber, which I would soon have to shed for ever. The wave of
such tender memories, coming to break over the idea that Albertine was
dead, overwhelmed me with the clash of such contrary tides that I could
not stay still; I got up, but suddenly I stopped dead in my tracks; the
same early light of dawn that I used to see at the time when I had just
left Albertine, feeling still warm and radiant from her kisses, had just
drawn over my curtains its now funereal blade, whose cold, dense and
implacable whiteness entered and struck me like a knife blow.

Soon the sounds of the street would start up, allowing me to read from
the qualitative scale of their sonorities the constantly rising degree
of heat amid which they resounded. But in this heat, which a few hours
later would be saturated with the scent of cherries, what I found (as
when replacing just one ingredient of a medicine by another is enough to
change it from a tonic and a stimulant into a depressant) was no longer
desire for women but anguish at Albertine’s departure. Moreover the
memory of all my other desires was impregnated as much with her and with
suffering as with the memory of pleasure. Even Venice, where I had
thought that I would find her presence intrusive (no doubt because I
felt confusedly that I would find myself needing it there), no longer
tempted me, now that Albertine was no longer alive. Albertine had seemed
to me an obstacle placed between me and all other things, because for me
she had been their container, and it was from her as from a jar that I
was able to take them. Now that this jar was broken, I was no longer
able to face grasping them, there was not a single one of them from
which I did not turn away, despondent, preferring not to taste of it. So
that my separation from her was far from opening up for me the field of
all possible pleasures that I had believed to be obstructed by her
presence. Moreover the obstacle to travelling and to enjoying life that
her presence may well have really been had only, as always, hidden other
obstacles, which resurfaced intact, now that this one had disappeared.
In similar fashion, previously, when some friendly visit prevented me
from working, even if I remained alone the following day, I did not work
any harder. If an illness, a duel or a runaway horse bring us face to
face with death, we realize how richly we would have enjoyed the life,
the sexual pleasure and the unknown lands that we are about to be
deprived of. And once the danger is past, what we fall back on is the
same monotonous existence where we knew none of all this.

Of course these very short nights cannot last long. In the end winter
must return, when I would no longer fear the memory of driving with her
all through the night until the all-too-hasty dawn. But would the first
frosts not bring back to me, preserved in their ice, the germ of my
first desires, when I sent the car for her at midnight, when it seemed
to take so long before I heard her ring the door-bell, which I could now
wait in vain for all eternity to hear? Would I not gather from them the
germ of my earlier anxiety, when twice I believed that she would never
return? At that time I saw her but rarely; but even the intervals that
there were between Albertine’s visits then, making her suddenly emerge
from several weeks plunged in the depths of an unknown life which I
could not attempt to possess, reassured me and pacified me by constantly
interrupting the first inklings of my jealousy and preventing them from
fusing into a solid mass in my heart. Just as they had been able to
soothe me in those days, so retrospectively those intervals bore the
imprint of suffering, now that I was no longer indifferent to the
unknown things that she might have done during those periods, and above
all, now that no visit from her would ever come again; so that those
January evenings when she used to come, and which I had for this reason
come to find so sweet, would now fill me not only with their bitter
north wind but also with gusts of anxiety which I had not felt at the
time, and which would return to me the first seeds of my love, but now
grown toxic. And when I thought that I would once again see the start of
the cold weather, which had always seemed so sad to me since the days of
Gilberte and our games on the Champs-Elysées; and when I thought that
evenings would return like that snowy evening when I had waited for
Albertine in vain long into the night, then, like an invalid with a weak
chest anxious for his body, what concerned me in my soul and what I
still feared most at those moments, trying to spare my grief and my
heart, was the return of this freezing weather, and I told myself that
the hardest period for me to get through would probably be the winter.
Since her memory was linked to every season, the only way of forgetting
it would have been to forget all of them, even if it meant that I would
have to learn to recognize them all over again, like an old man who has
suffered from hemiplegia, learning to read again; I would have had to
renounce the whole universe. Only a real death of my self, I told myself
(were it not impossible), would be capable of consoling me for her
death. I did not realize that the death of the self is neither
impossible nor extraordinary; it is accomplished without our knowledge
and, if necessary, without our consent every day, and I would suffer
from the repetition of every sort of day that not only nature but
accidental circumstances or more conventional arrangements could
introduce into a season. Soon the date when I had gone to Balbec that
last summer would return, when my love, which was not yet inseparable
from jealousy and which was not concerned with what Albertine might be
doing all day long, had so far to go before becoming a love so different
and so special in its latter stages, so unique that this last year, when
Albertine’s destiny had started to change and had come to an end,
appeared to me as full, diverse and vast as a century. Then there would
be the memory of later days, but from earlier years; Sundays when the
weather was bad and yet everyone had gone out, into the bleak emptiness
of the afternoon, when the noise of the wind and the rain would in
former times have incited me to act as a ‘philosopher in the garret’,²⁰
how anxious I would become as I saw the hour approach when Albertine had
so unexpectedly come to see me and had caressed me for the first time,
breaking off when Françoise had brought the lamp in, at that time, now
dead twice over, when it was Albertine who was curious to learn all
about me, when my affection for her could legitimately entertain such
high hopes! And even, later in the season, those glorious evenings when
the sculleries and the girls’ boarding schools, like chapels with their
doors ajar and bathed in a golden dust, allow their demi-goddesses to
garland the streets and bring their private conversations so close to us
that we feverishly desire to penetrate their mythical existence, now
recalled nothing more than Albertine’s affections, whose presence by my
side prevented me from approaching them.

Moreover, to the memory of these purely natural hours I would have to
add the mental landscape which makes of them something unique. When,
later, I was to hear the goatherd’s horn in the first days of fine,
almost Italian weather, the same sunshine would now mingle with its
light the anxiety of knowing that Albertine was at the Trocadéro,
perhaps with Léa and the two girls, now the familiar, domestic and
almost conjugal sweetness of a spouse, however cloying, whom Françoise
was going to bring back home. I had felt that my pride was bolstered by
this telephone message from Françoise, transmitting the homage paid by
Albertine in returning with her. I had been mistaken. If it had
intoxicated me, it was because it had made me feel that the woman whom I
loved really belonged to me, lived only for me, and, even at a distance,
without my needing to worry about her, looked on me as her lord and
master, returning at a snap of my fingers. And thus this telephone
message had been a package of sweetmeats sent to me from the farthest
reaches of the Trocadéro region, which happened to contain sources of
happiness irradiating me with their pain-killing molecules and healing
balm, finally restoring me to such sweet and carefree spirits that all I
had to do – yielding unrestricted by the slightest care to Wagner’s
music – was await Albertine’s undoubted return, feeling a coolness and a
total lack of impatience in which I ought to have recognized happiness,
but failed to do so. And the cause of my happiness in her returning,
obeying me, and belonging to me, was to be found, not in pride, but in
my love. I would have found it pointless now to be able to snap my
fingers and order fifty women to return, even from the Indies, let alone
the Trocadéro. But that day, sensing Albertine approaching me
submissively, while I was alone in my room playing music, I had breathed
in, scattered like dust on a sunbeam, one of those substances which are
good for the soul, as others are healthy for the body. Then, half an
hour later, there had been Albertine’s arrival, then, afterwards, the
drive with Albertine, an arrival and a drive which I had considered
boring because for me they were guaranteed in advance, but which because
of this very guarantee, as soon as Françoise had telephoned me to say
that she was bringing her back, had filled the following hours with a
golden peace, had turned them as it were into a second day entirely
different from the first, because its emotional foundations were
entirely different, making the day quite unique, adding its original
touch to the variety of those that I had previously known, a day which I
could never have imagined – as we are unable to imagine a restful
summer’s day if such days have not existed in the calendar of days that
we have experienced – a day which I could not be absolutely certain to
recall, for its tranquillity was now overlaid with the suffering that I
had not felt at the time. But much later, when I gradually moved
backwards through the times that I had spent on the way towards loving
Albertine, when my cauterized heart was able to detach itself from
Albertine, long after her death, then, when I was at last able to recall
without suffering the day when Albertine had gone shopping with
Françoise instead of staying at the Trocadéro, I remembered that day
pleasurably as one belonging to a mental season which I had not
previously known; I at last remembered it while no longer adding
suffering to it, but on the contrary, rather as we remember certain
summer days which we found too hot at the time, and where it is only
after the event that we extract from their alloys the pure, hallmarked
gold and the indelible lapis lazuli.

In this way these few years not only imposed upon the memory of
Albertine, which made them so unhappy, the changing colours, varying
modalities and dying embers of their seasons and their hours, from their
late June afternoons to their winter evenings, from moonlight over the
sea to dawn on returning home, from snow in Paris to autumn leaves at
Saint-Cloud,²¹ but also transformed the particular ideas that I had
successively formed of Albertine, of the physical appearance with which
I pictured her at each of these moments, and of the greater or lesser
frequency with which I saw her in any particular season, making the
season itself seem more or less diffuse or concentrated, of the hours of
anxious waiting that she had provoked, of the desire that I felt for her
at certain moments, of hopes nourished and then lost; all this modified
the nature of my retrospective sadness just as much as the impressions
of light and scent which were associated with it, and complemented each
of the solar years that I had lived through and which even with just
their springs, autumns and winters were already so sad because of their
memory being inseparable from her, augmenting it with a sort of
sentimental year where the hours were not defined by the position of the
sun but by time spent waiting for a rendezvous; where the length of the
days or the changes in temperature were measured by the rise in my
hopes, the progress of our intimacy, the gradual transformation of her
face, the places she had visited, the frequency and style of the letters
that she had sent me during her absence, her greater or lesser eagerness
to meet me when she had returned. And finally if each of these changes
of weather and season yielded a different Albertine, it was not only
through the evocation of similar moments. But we should not forget that,
even before I fell in love, each season had made a different man of me,
with different desires because he had different perceptions, a man who,
having dreamed of nothing but storms and cliffs the night before, awoke
ready to leave for Italy, once the indiscreet light of springtime had
let the scent of roses seep through the cracks in the shutters of his
uneven slumbers. And even when I was in love, had not my changing mental
atmosphere and the varying pressure of my beliefs from one day to the
next diminished the visibility of my own love, was it not one day high
and rising, another day steady and fair, and another, falling to storm
point? For we exist only through what we possess, and we possess only
what is actually present, since so many of our memories, moods and ideas
leave us and travel to faraway places, where we lose sight of them! Then
we can no longer enter them into the accounting system whose sum is our
whole being. But they find secret ways of returning within us. And some
evenings, having fallen asleep hardly missing Albertine any longer – we
can miss only what we remember – I awoke to find that a whole fleet of
memories had sailed into my clearest consciousness and had become
marvellously distinct. Then I wept for the things which I saw so well
and which for me the day before had been utterly absent. Albertine’s
name and her death had changed their meaning; her betrayals had suddenly
resumed their old significance.
How could she have appeared dead to me, when now in order to think of
her I had at my disposal only the same images that I saw alternately
when she was alive: bent over the swiftly turning mythological wheel of
her bicycle, harnessed on rainy days into the vulcanized warrior’s tunic
that made her bosom bulge, her turban-helmeted head swarming with
serpents, as she spread terror throughout the streets of Balbec; on the
evenings when we took our champagne out into the woods of Chantepie, her
changed, provocative voice, her face lit by a pale fire reddening only
at the cheekbones, which, since I found it difficult to see in the car
in the darkness, I drew towards the moonlight and which I tried now in
vain to recall or to visualize in the endless darkness. A small
statuette in our crossing to the island, or a peaceful figure with her
coarse-grained skin as she sat at the pianola, she was by turns swift
and stormy, provocative and diaphanous, or an unmoved and smiling angel
of music. Each Albertine was attached to a moment, to a date where I was
transported when I visualized her again. Then again, past moments do not
stay still; they maintain in our memory the momentum which was driving
them towards the future – towards a future which itself has already
become the past – dragging us in their wake. I had never caressed
Albertine in her wet-weather rubber-wear, I wanted to ask her to remove
her armour, in order to explore with her the love of life under canvas,
the fraternity of travel. But it was no longer possible, she was dead.
And then again, for fear of corrupting her, I had pretended never to
understand her on those evenings when she seemed to offer me certain
pleasures; pleasures however which, had I not adopted this attitude, she
might not have sought elsewhere, and which now excited the most frenzied
desire in me. I would not have felt them in the same way if they had
been provided by someone else, but I could travel the whole world over
in search of the girl who might do so without ever meeting her, for
Albertine was dead. It seemed that I had to choose between two facts and
decide which was true, so blatantly did the death of Albertine – which
arose for me out of a reality which I had not known, her life in
Touraine – contradict all the thoughts that linked me to her, my
desires, my regrets, my tenderness, my rage and my jealousy. Such a
wealth of memories borrowed from her life’s inventory, such a profusion
of emotions evoking or involving her life, seemed to make it
unbelievable that Albertine could be dead. Such a profusion of feelings,
for while my memory preserved my affection it also preserved its whole
variety. It was not Albertine alone who was only a succession of
moments, it was also myself. My love for her had not been simple: to
curiosity about the unknown had been added a sensual desire, and to my
feelings of almost domestic sweetness, feelings sometimes of
indifference, sometimes of jealous rage. I was not one single man, but
the march-past of a composite army manned, depending on the time of day,
by passionate, indifferent or jealous men – jealous men who were never
jealous of the same woman. And doubtless this would be the source of an
eventual cure, which I did not desire. The individuals in a crowd may
without our noticing be replaced one by one, and others again may come
to suppress or supplement them, so that at the end of the day a change
has been accomplished which it would be impossible to imagine in a
single, unitary being. The complexity of my love and my identity
multiplied and diversified my suffering. And yet they could still be
classified under the two heads whose alternation had ruled the whole
life of my love for Albertine, ruled in turns by confidence and jealous
suspicion.

If (bearing as I did the double yoke of the present and the past) I
found it so difficult to accept that Albertine, who was so alive within
me, was dead, perhaps it was just as paradoxical that my suspicion of
misdeeds committed by Albertine, who today was stripped of the flesh
that had enjoyed them and who was no longer capable of them or
responsible for them, should excite in me such suffering, which I would
happily have blessed if I could have seen in it the proof of the
spiritual presence of a materially non-existent person, instead of the
inevitably fading reflection of impressions which she had caused me in
the past. A woman no longer capable of experiencing pleasure with other
women should no longer have excited my jealousy, if only I could have
brought my affections up to date. But this was impossible, because they
could locate their object, Albertine, only in memories where she still
lived on. Since at any moment when I thought of her, I resuscitated her,
her infidelities could never be those of a dead woman, for the moment
when she had committed them became the present moment, not only for
Albertine but also for whichever of my selves was suddenly enlisted to
contemplate her. So that no anachronism could ever separate the
indissoluble couple where each new guilty woman was immediately matched
with a woeful, jealous, but always contemporaneous, lover. During her
last few months I had kept her locked up in my house. But now in my
imagination Albertine was free; she used this freedom ill, she
prostituted herself to all and sundry. Previously I had never stopped
thinking about the uncertain future that unfolded before us, and I tried
to read it. And now what was cast before me like the shadow of the
future – as worrying as the future, because it was as uncertain, as
difficult to decipher and as mysterious but even more cruel, because
unlike the future, it did not allow me the possibility or the illusion
of intervening to change it, and also because it would unfold as far as
my life itself, without my companion being there to alleviate the
suffering that it caused me – was no longer Albertine’s future, but her
past. Her past? This is not the right term, since in jealousy there is
neither past nor future, for what it imagines is always present.

These changes in atmosphere cause other changes in the inner man,
awakening forgotten selves, counteracting the lethargy of habit,
reviving the force of memories here, of suffering there. How much more
so for me if this new climate recalled days in Balbec when Albertine,
despite the threat of rain, for instance, had set out, God knows why,
for a long ride, strapped tightly into her rubbers! If she had still
been alive today, she would doubtless be setting off, in similar
weather, on a similar expedition in Touraine. But since she was no
longer able to do so, I should not have suffered from this thought; but
the slightest change in the weather renewed my aches and pains, as it
would in the missing limb of an amputee.

Suddenly there came a memory which I had not seen for a long time, for
it had remained dissolved in the transparent, fluid expanses of my
memory, until it formed into crystals. Thus it had happened that several
years before, when we were talking about her bath-robe, Albertine had
blushed. In those days I was not jealous of her. But afterwards I wished
I could ask her if she could remember this conversation and tell me why
she had blushed. It had concerned me all the more since I had been told
that Léa’s two young girl-friends frequented her hotel’s bathing
establishment and, so people said, not only to take a shower. But for
fear of annoying Albertine, or in the hope of better days to come, I had
constantly postponed discussing it with her, and then I forgot about it.
However, shortly after Albertine’s death, I caught a glimpse of this
memory, imprinted with the irritating but solemn character of an enigma
left eternally insoluble by the death of the only person who could have
shed light on it. Could I not at least try to learn whether Albertine
might not perhaps have committed some real or even apparent misdemeanour
in this bathing establishment? By sending someone to Balbec, I might
possibly succeed. As long as she was alive, I am sure that I would not
have learned anything. But tongues are strangely loosened and are swift
to denounce people’s faults when the revenge of the person accused is no
longer to be feared. As the constitution of the imagination, which
remains rudimentary and simplistic (not having passed through the
various transformations which palliate the primitive models of human
invention, which we now hardly recognize, whether we think of the
barometer, the balloon or the telephone, etc., compared to their later
improvements), allows us to see so few things at once, this memory of
the bath-house took over the whole field of my inner vision.

Sometimes, in the dark alleyways of sleep, I stumbled over one of those
bad dreams which we do not take very seriously, for the main reason that
the sadness which they instil in us, like the sickness following an
anaesthetic, rarely lasts more than an hour after our awakening, but for
another reason too, which is that they occur very rarely, hardly more
than once every two or three years. And even then we are not sure
whether we have already encountered them – or whether our impression of
_déjà vu_ might not be either projected on to them by an illusion, or a
reduplication (for it is more than a repetition) of our experience.

Of course, since I had my doubts about Albertine’s life, and her death,
I ought to have started my enquiries much sooner. But the same lethargy
and cowardice that had kept me submissive to Albertine while she was
there, prevented me from undertaking anything from the time that I no
longer saw her. And yet sometimes a flash of energy may emerge from the
weakness which has dogged us for years. I decided to make at least one
enquiry, however partial. You might have thought that there had been
nothing else in Albertine’s life. I wondered whom I might send to try to
make enquiries on the spot, in Balbec. Aimé seemed to be the right
choice. Apart from the fact that he had an excellent knowledge of the
location, he belonged to that category of working people who look after
their own interests, are faithful to those they serve, are indifferent
to all varieties of morality, and who – because if we pay them well they
ignore anything that would hinder their devotion to our will, for they
reveal themselves to be as incapable of indiscretion, lethargy or
impropriety as they are of scruples – pass for ‘good men’. These are men
in whom we may place complete confidence. When Aimé had left, I thought
how much more effective it would have been for me if I could have asked
Albertine herself about what he was going to try to discover there. And
straight away the thought of this question that I wished I could have
put to Albertine, that I was going to put to her, brought her back to my
side, not thanks to an effort of resurrection but through one of those
chance encounters which – as happens in the kind of photograph which is
a snapshot, rather than a ‘posed’ portrait – always breathe life into
the person; at the same time as I imagined our conversation, I felt how
impossible it was; approaching it from a different angle, I had again
come up against the idea that Albertine was dead, Albertine, who
inspired in me the kind of affection that we have for absent women whose
embellished image is uncorrected by any real sighting of them, but also
inspired sadness, from the thought that the poor young thing was
deprived for ever of the pleasures of life. And immediately I shifted
suddenly from being tortured by jealousy to feeling despair at our
separation.

What now filled my heart, instead of suspicion and hatred, was the
tender memory of hours of affectionate intimacy passed with the sister
whom death had really made me lose, since my sorrow was directed not at
what Albertine had been for me but at what my heart, desiring to
participate in the more general emotions of love, had come to persuade
me that she was; then I realized that this life which had so bored me –
or at least so I thought – had, on the contrary, been delicious; I felt
now that the briefest moments spent talking with her about even the most
trivial things had been augmented and suffused with a voluptuousness
which, it is true, I had not noticed at the time, but which had already
caused me to seek them out so persistently and so exclusively; the
slightest details which I recalled, such as the movements that she made
when sitting beside me in the car, or sitting opposite me at the table
in her room, sent through my soul ripples of sweetness and sadness which
gradually spread out to overflow it entirely.

I had never found this room where we dined attractive: I had only told
Albertine that I did, so that my friend would be happy to live in it.
Now the curtains, the chairs and the books no longer left me unmoved. It
is not only art which is able to imbue the most insignificant things
with charm and mystery; this same power to bring them into an intimate
relationship with ourselves is also granted to suffering. At the time I
had paid no attention to the dinner which we had eaten together on our
return from the Bois de Boulogne, before I went to the Verdurins’, a
dinner whose grave sweetness now filled my eyes with tears. The
impressions created by love are disproportionate to our other
impressions of life, but we do not realize this when they are mingled
together. It is not from below, in the tumultuous streets and the
close-packed neighbouring houses, it is only as we move away to the
slopes of a nearby hill, to a distance where the whole town has
disappeared or forms only a confused mass at ground level, that we are
able, in the contemplative and welcoming solitude of the evening, to
appreciate the unique, pure, and eternal height of a cathedral. I
attempted to embrace the image of Albertine through my tears while
thinking of all the serious and perceptive remarks that she had made
that evening. One morning I thought that I glimpsed the oblong shape of
a hill surrounded by mist, and felt the warmth of a cup of chocolate,
while my heart was horribly wrung by the memory of the afternoon when
Albertine had come to see me and when I had kissed her for the first
time: it was because I had just heard the boiler gurgle as it was relit.
And in my anger I threw away an invitation to Mme Verdurin’s that
Françoise had just brought me. How much more strongly the impression,
which I had had when I went to dine for the first time at La Raspelière,
that death does not strike all its creatures at the same age impressed
me now that Albertine was dead so young, while Brichot continued to dine
with Mme Verdurin, who was still entertaining guests and would perhaps
continue to do so for years to come! Immediately Brichot’s name reminded
me how he had accompanied me home at the end of that same evening, and I
had seen the light at Albertine’s window from down below. I had already
thought back to this on a number of occasions, but I had never
approached this memory from the same angle. For, although our memories
are entirely personal, they resemble those estates which have hidden
side-gates, which often we ourselves have not discovered and have to
have opened by a neighbour, so that we find ourselves arriving home from
at least one direction which we had never taken before. Then, thinking
of the void which would greet me on my return home and the fact that I
would never again see Albertine’s room from down below, since its light
was for ever extinguished, I understood how mistaken I had been, on
leaving Brichot that evening, to believe that I felt disappointment and
regret at not being able to walk away and seek love elsewhere; I
understood how mistaken I had been, and that it was only because I
believed myself to be in absolutely safe possession of the treasure
whose reflections poured down on me from above that I had neglected to
assess its worth, which inevitably led me to see it as less valuable
than other pleasures, however slight, to which I did attribute value
because I was reduced to imagining them. I understood what a plenitude
of sweetness and life this light, which seemed to emanate from a prison,
contained for me, and how it was none other than the materialization of
something that had intoxicated me for a moment but had then appeared for
ever unattainable the evening when Albertine had slept under the same
roof as me at Balbec; I understood that the life which I had led with
her in my home in Paris, which was her home, was precisely the
attainment of that profound peace of which I had dreamed.

I would never have been able to console myself if the conversation which
I had had with Albertine when returning from the Bois de Boulogne before
that last soirée at the Verdurins’ had never taken place, that
conversation which had tended to fuse Albertine with my intellectual
life and had in certain areas made us one and the same being. For there
is no doubt that if I lingered affectionately over her intelligence and
her kindness for me, it was not because they were greater than those of
other people whom I had known; had Mme de Cambremer not said to me at
Balbec, ‘How could you possibly spend whole days with your cousin when
you could spend them with Elstir, who is a genius!’? I appreciated
Albertine’s intelligence because she evoked in me by association what I
referred to as her sweetness, as we attribute to the sweetness of a
fruit a certain sensation which exists only in our palate. And in fact,
when I thought of Albertine’s intelligence, my lips moved instinctively
forwards to taste a memory whose reality I liked to think of as external
and consisting in the objective superiority of a person. I have to say
that I had known people whose intelligence was superior. But the
infinite extent, or the egoism, of love causes us to love people whose
intellectual and moral features are the least objectively defined for
us, we readjust them endlessly according to our desires and our fears,
we cannot separate them from ourselves, they are no more than a vast and
vague terrain where we externalize our affection. Even our own bodies,
where we are assailed by so many pains and pleasures, do not display a
silhouette as clear as that of a tree or a house or a passing stranger.
And perhaps I had been wrong not to try harder to get to know Albertine
in her own right. Just as where her charm was concerned I had for some
time considered only the different positions in the calendar of the
years that she adopted in my memories, and just as I had been surprised
to see her spontaneously enriched with transformations which seemed to
go beyond any simple difference of perspective, so I ought to have tried
to understand her character in the same way as that of any other person,
and perhaps this might have explained to me why she hid her secret so
persistently from me and might have enabled me to cut short this
strangely savage conflict between us, which had led to the death of
Albertine. And with my great pity for her at that time I felt great
shame in surviving her. Indeed it seemed to me, in the moments when I
suffered the least, that I almost benefited from her death, for a woman
is all the more useful in our lives if she is an agent of sorrow rather
than an element of happiness, and there is not a single woman whose
possession is as precious as the truths which she enables us to discover
by making us suffer. In such moments, connecting my grandmother’s death
with that of Albertine, it seemed to me that my life was besmirched by a
double murder for which only the cowardice of society could forgive me.
I had dreamed of being appreciated by Albertine, of not being
misunderstood by her, believing that it was for the greater satisfaction
of being appreciated and not misunderstood, whereas so many others could
have done it better. We wish to be understood because we wish to be
loved, and we wish to be loved because it is we who are in love. Whether
others understand us is unimportant, and their love importunate. My joy
at having possessed a little of Albertine’s intellect and of her heart
did not derive from their intrinsic value, but from the fact that this
possession was one more step on the way towards the total possession of
Albertine, which had been my aim and my fantasy from the first day that
I had seen her. When we speak of a woman’s ‘kindness’, we are probably
only projecting outside ourselves the pleasure that we feel on seeing
her, like children when they say, ‘My dear little bed, my dear little
pillow, my dear little hawthorn blossom.’ Which may also by the way
explain why men never say of a woman who is faithful to them, ‘She is so
kind,’ but do so often say it of a woman who is unfaithful. Mme de
Cambremer judged, quite rightly, that Elstir had great spiritual charm.
But we cannot judge in the same way the charm of someone who, like
everyone else external to us, is depicted on the fringes of our
consciousness and the charm of someone who, as a result of a series of
unintentional but persistent errors of navigation, has become lodged
within our own bodies, to such an extent that we ask ourselves
retrospectively if having looked at some woman on a certain day in the
corridor of a little coastal railway train has not made us experience as
much suffering as would be caused by a surgeon trying to remove a bullet
from our heart. A simple croissant, as we start to eat it, can make us
experience more pleasure than all the bunting, rock partridge and
leveret dined on by Louis XV, and the blade of grass quivering a few
inches away from our eyes when we are lying down on the mountainside may
mask the towering peak of the mountain top if this is several miles
away. In fact our mistake is not that we over-appreciate the
intelligence and the kindness of the woman we love, however small they
may really be. Our mistake is to remain indifferent to the kindness and
the intelligence of others. Falsehood or goodness only start to generate
the indignation or gratitude that they should normally always stimulate
in us when they come from a woman whom we love, and physical desire has
the marvellous power of setting a true value for the intellect as well
as providing solid foundations for our moral life. I would never again
encounter that divine thing: a person with whom I could discuss
everything, in whom I could confide all. Confide? But did not other
people show me more confidence than Albertine? Did I not have more
wide-ranging conversations with others? Is the point that confiding and
conversing are in themselves paltry things, whose imperfections are
neither here nor there, until they are blended with love, which alone is
divine? I had a vision of Albertine’s pink face beneath her black hair
as she sat at the pianola; I felt her tongue against my lips as she
tried to part them, her maternal, nourishing, holy, inedible tongue,
whose hidden fire and secret dew prevented her caresses from being
superficial, even when she did no more than slide her tongue along the
surface of my neck or my stomach, as if they somehow issued from her
inner flesh, turned inside out like a piece of material exposing its
lining, endowing even the most external contact with the mysterious
sweetness of a penetration.

I cannot even say that what made me feel the loss of all these moments
of utter sweetness, which nothing could ever bring back to me, was
actually despair. In order to despair of this life, when we see that it
will be irremediably unhappy for evermore, we must still desire to cling
to it. I had been desperate in Balbec when I saw day dawn and understood
that no day would ever again bring me happiness. I had remained just as
self-centred since then, but the self to which I had latterly become
attached, the self that constituted my inner reserves, those which bring
into play the instinct of preservation, this self was no longer alive;
when I thought of my vital strengths, of my life force, of what was best
in me, I thought of this one treasure which I had possessed (which I
alone had possessed since others could not know precisely the hidden
feelings that it had inspired in me) and which no one could now take
away from me since I no longer possessed it. And to tell the truth, I
had only ever possessed it in so far as I had always tried to imagine
myself possessing it. I had not only been imprudent enough, while
watching Albertine with my lips and lodging her in my heart, to make her
live within me, as well as committing that other folly of mingling
domestic love with the pleasure of the senses. I had also tried to
convince myself that our relationship was one of love, that what we
engaged in together was what people call love, because she obediently
returned the kisses that I gave her. And from having acquired the habit
of believing this, I had lost not only a woman whom I loved, but a woman
who loved me, my sister, my child, my tender mistress. And finally I had
experienced a happiness and an unhappiness which Swann had not known,
precisely because, during all the time that he had loved Odette and had
been so jealous of her, there were days when he had hardly seen her at
all, since it was virtually impossible for him to go and call on her
whenever she called off their appointment at the last moment. But
afterwards he had had her to himself, as his wife, until he died.
Whereas I, on the other hand, even while I was so jealous of Albertine,
was happier than Swann, for I had her at home with me. I had in fact
attained what Swann had so often dreamed of and what he had achieved in
reality only when he had become indifferent to it. But ultimately I had
not kept Albertine as he had kept Odette. She had fled, she had died.
For nothing is ever repeated exactly, and the most analogous lives, even
those which due to likeness of character and similarity of circumstance
one may choose to present as symmetrical, remain in many aspects
opposed. In losing my life I would not have lost much; I would have lost
only an empty form, the frame for a missing masterpiece. Indifferent to
what I might henceforth fill it in with, but happy and proud of what it
had contained, I fell back on the memory of such sweet moments, and this
moral support gave me a feeling of well-being that even the approach of
death would not have disturbed.

How she would hurry to visit me in Balbec whenever I asked to see her,
tarrying only a few last moments in order to lace her hair with perfume
for my pleasure! These images of Balbec and Paris which I recalled with
such pleasure, were the all-too-recent pages of her short life, which
had been turned so quickly. Everything that for me was no more than
memory had for her been action, the precipitate action of a tragedy,
hurtling swiftly towards death. People evolve in one way within us, but
also in another way outside us (I had felt this plainly on those
evenings when I had noted how Albertine’s character had become enriched
with new qualities, and not only due to my memory), and each continually
interacts with the other. Although, as I struggled first to understand
Albertine, then to possess her entirely, I had done no more than obey
our need to reduce the mystery of any person through experience to
elements pettily similar to those composing our own selves, I had not
been able to do so without in my turn influencing Albertine’s life.
Perhaps my wealth and the prospect of a dazzling marriage had attracted
her; my jealousy had retained her; her kindness, her intelligence, her
feelings of guilt or her sheer skill and cunning had led her to accept,
and led me to render increasingly harsh, a captivity forged simply by
the progress of the inner workings of my mind, but which had none the
less had repercussions on Albertine’s life, destined through their
backlash to pose my psyche new and increasingly painful problems, since
it was from my prison that she had escaped in order to kill herself
riding a horse which without me she would never have owned, leaving me,
even after her death, with suspicions whose truth, if confirmed, would
perhaps be crueller for me than the discovery at Balbec that Albertine
had known Mlle Vinteuil, since Albertine would no longer be there to
soothe me. So much so that this long complaint of the soul which
believes that it lives enclosed within itself is only superficially a
monologue, since the echoes of reality cause it to change tack and since
any single life resembles an improvised experiment in subjective
psychology, yet one which at a distance provides the ‘plot’ of a purely
realist novel belonging to a different reality, a different existence,
whose reversals of fortune intervene one after the other to inflect the
curve and change the direction of the psychological experiment. How taut
had been the mechanism of our love, how swift its evolution and, despite
some initial delays, interruptions and hesitations, as in some of
Balzac’s short stories or Schumann’s ballads, how swift its resolution!
It was within the course of this last year, which had seemed to me to
last a century, so much had Albertine’s position changed in my thoughts
between Balbec and her departure for Paris, sometimes independently of
me and often unbeknown to me, that I had to insert this whole life of
affection, which had lasted such a short time and which however appeared
to me as a plenitude or even an infinity impossible ever to grasp, and
yet which I found indispensable. Indispensable without perhaps having
ever been in itself or primarily anything necessary, since I would not
have met Albertine if I had not read the description of the church at
Balbec in an archaeological treatise; if Swann, telling me that this
church was almost Persian, had not orientated my desires towards the
Norman Byzantine style; if a company, in building a comfortable and
hygienic grand hotel in Balbec, had not persuaded my parents to grant my
wish and send me to Balbec. Doubtless once in the Balbec which I had so
long desired, I had not found the Persian church of which I dreamed, nor
the eternal mists. The charming ten-to-two²² train itself had not
matched up to my imaginings. But in exchange for what the imagination
leads us to expect and what we take so much trouble to try to discover,
life gives us something that we were far from being able to imagine. Who
could have thought in Combray, when I awaited my mother’s good-night
kiss with such sadness, that these anxieties would be cured and would
then one day be revived not in connection with my mother, but with a
young lady who at first would be no more than a flower seen against the
horizon of the sea that my eyes would every day be drawn to watch,
albeit a thinking flower, and one in whose thoughts I desired to take an
important place in so puerile a fashion that I suffered from the fact
that she did not know that I knew Mme de Villeparisis? Yet it was on
account of that good-night kiss from such a stranger that, some years
later, I was to suffer just as much as I did as a child when my mother
did not come to see me. But I would never have known this now so
necessary Albertine, of whose love my soul had become almost entirely
composed, if Swann had not spoken to me of Balbec. Her life would
perhaps have lasted longer, and mine would have been void of what now
constituted my martyrdom. And thus it seemed to me that through my
totally selfish affection I had let Albertine die, just as previously I
had murdered my grandmother. Even later, even after I had already got to
know her at Balbec, I could not have loved her as I did after that. For
when I renounced Gilberte and knew that I could one day pursue another
woman, I hardly dared doubt that, at least in the past, I could not have
loved anyone other than Gilberte. And yet in the case of Albertine I no
longer even had any doubt, I was sure that she did not have to be the
one that I must love, that it could have been someone else. All it would
have needed was for Mlle de Stermaria, the evening when I was to dine
with her on the island of the Bois de Boulogne, not to have called it
off. There was still time then for this feat of the imagination, which
enables us to extract from a woman a notion of the individual so special
that she appears to us to be unique in herself as well as predestined
and necessary for us, to have been focussed on Mlle de Stermaria. At
best, viewing things from an almost biological viewpoint, I could say
that I might have experienced the same exclusive love for another woman,
but not absolutely any other. For although Albertine, who was plump and
dark, did not resemble Gilberte, who was slender and red-haired, both
none the less shared the same robust health, the same sensual cheeks and
the same enigmatic look. They were the kind of woman who would not have
caught the attention of some men who, on the other hand, would have done
anything, however crazy, for another kind, who ‘left me cold’.²³ A man
nearly always has the same manner of catching cold, of falling ill,
which is to say that he needs a particular combination of circumstances:
it is natural that, when he falls in love, it will be with a certain
type of woman, although the type may be loosely defined. The first time
that Albertine looked at me and fired my imagination her eyes were not
so different from those of Gilberte the first time. I could almost
believe that the sombre and sensual personality and the cunning, wilful
character of Gilberte had returned to tempt me, incarnate this time in
the body of Albertine, which was quite different and yet was in some
ways analogous. In Albertine’s case, thanks to our totally different
kind of life together, where within a block of thoughts into which no
fissure of distraction or forgetfulness could insinuate itself, my
painful preoccupations maintained a permanently cohesive whole, her
living body, unlike Gilberte’s, had never for a single day ceased to be
the one where I located what I subsequently recognized as what for me
was feminine attractiveness (although it would not have been for
others). But she was dead. I would forget her. Who knows then whether
the same hot-blooded, restless, fantastical qualities might not return
again one day to upset me, but incarnate this time in a feminine form
which I could not yet foresee. Starting out from Gilberte, I could have
as little imagined Albertine, or the fact that I would love her, as the
memory of Vinteuil’s sonata could have enabled me to imagine his septet.
Worse still, even on the first occasions that I had seen Albertine, I
had managed to believe that it would be the other girls whom I would
love. Moreover, if I had met her a year earlier, she might even have
appeared to me as dull as a grey sky before daybreak. But if I had
changed my attitude towards her, she herself had also changed, and the
girl who had approached my bedside the day when I had written to Mlle de
Stermaria was no longer the same as the one whom I had known at Balbec,
whether simply because she had burst out into womanhood after appearing
to me at the moment of puberty, or whether because there was some other
set of circumstances that I had never been able to fathom. At all
events, even if the woman I were one day to love should in some respects
resemble her, that is, if my choice of a woman were not entirely free,
even perhaps necessarily in some way directed, this meant none the less
that it was directed towards something vaster than an individual,
towards a type of woman, and this removed all necessity from my love for
Albertine. We know full well that this unique woman, whose face we see
before our eyes more constantly than the daylight itself – since even
with our eyes closed, we never for a moment cease to cherish her lovely
eyes and her beautiful nose, and will do anything we can to see them
again – could have been a different woman, if we had visited a town
other than the one where we met her, if we had walked down different
streets, if we had been invited to a different salon. Do we believe her
to be unique? She is everywhere. And yet she is consistent and
indestructible before our loving eyes, irreplaceable for long after by
anyone else. The reason is that this woman has done nothing but use all
sorts of magic spells to invoke the thousands of elements of affection
which exist within us in a fragmentary state, to assemble and unite
them, bridging all the gaps between them; it is we ourselves who, in
creating her features, have furnished all the solid substance of the
beloved. From this it follows that, even if we are only one among
thousands for her, and perhaps last in the line, for us she is the only
one, and the one at whom our whole life is aimed. Of course I had even
felt quite clearly that this love was not necessary, not only because it
could have happened with Mlle de Stermaria, but even without that, as I
came to know it better, and started to find that it seemed too similar
to what it had been for other women, and also to feel that it was vaster
than Albertine, enveloping her without taking any heed of her, like a
tide engulfing a fragile reef. But gradually, by dint of living with
Albertine, I could no longer disentangle myself from the chains that I
myself had forged; the habit of associating the person of Albertine with
emotions that I had not derived from her directly led me none the less
to feel that they were special to her, just as habit, according to a
certain school of philosophers, gives to the simple association of ideas
between two phenomena the force and the necessity of a causal law. I had
believed that my connections and my wealth would enable me to dispense
with suffering, but perhaps too expeditiously, because this seemed to
enable me to dispense with feeling, loving and imagining; I felt envious
of some poor country girl, who, in the absence of connections or even
the telegraph, might spend many months musing over a sorrow that she
cannot artificially put to sleep. Yet I now realized that, whereas in
the case of Mme de Guermantes, who enjoyed so many advantages that
helped maintain an infinite distance between her and me, I had seen the
gulf abruptly bridged by public opinion and my analysis, which found
social privilege to be no more than an inert and changeable matter, by a
converse but reciprocal process my connections, my wealth and all the
material means from which both my position and the civilization of the
day allowed me to benefit had done no more than postpone the moment of
the hand-to-hand struggle with the contradictory, inflexible will of
Albertine, which had resisted all pressure. Of course I had been able to
exchange telegrams and telephone calls with Saint-Loup and remain in
constant touch with the telegraph office in Tours, but had these
expectations not been vain, their result null? And did a country girl
with no social advantages and no connections, or people who lived before
these advances of civilization, not suffer less? Because one desires
less and misses less what one has always believed inaccessible and which
has, for this reason, remained as it were unreal. We desire a person
more when she is about to yield, expectation anticipates possession; but
regret, too, amplifies desire. Mlle de Stermaria’s refusal to come to
dinner on the island of the Bois de Boulogne is what prevented her from
being the person that I loved. This too could have been enough to enable
me to love her, if I had seen her soon enough afterwards. As soon as I
had found out that she would not come, entertaining the implausible
hypothesis – which did however turn out to be correct – that if someone
were jealous of her and kept her away from company, I might possibly
never see her again, I had suffered so much that I would have given
anything to see her again, and it was one of the greatest anxieties
which I had ever known that Saint-Loup’s arrival had assuaged. Yet after
a certain age our loves and our mistresses are daughters of our anguish:
our past, and the physical lesions within whose lines it lies inscribed,
determine our future. For Albertine in particular, the fact that it was
not necessary for her to be the one whom I loved was, even without these
neighbouring loves, inscribed in the history of my love for her, that is
for her and her girl-friends. For it was not even a love like that for
Gilberte, but one created by its dispersal among several girls. It is
possible that it was because of her, and because they appeared to me to
be something analogous to her, that I had enjoyed the company of her
girl-friends. And yet I must admit that for quite a time a hesitation
among all of them was possible, as my choice wandered from one to the
other, and when I thought that I preferred one, it was enough for her to
keep me waiting or refuse to see me for me to start feeling love for
her. On several occasions it could easily have happened, when Andrée was
due to come to see me in Balbec, that if Albertine had let me down just
before Andrée’s visit, my heart would have started pounding, I would
have thought that I would never see Albertine again and that she was the
one whom I loved. And when Andrée did come, I was being perfectly
truthful when I told her (as had I told her in Paris when I had learned
that Albertine had known Mlle Vinteuil), although she might have thought
that I was speaking disingenuously and for her benefit, whereas I would
in fact have used the same terms if I had been happy the day before with
Albertine: ‘Alas, if only you had come earlier, now I am in love with
someone else.’ But even in this case of Andrée replaced by Albertine
when I had learned that the latter had known Mlle Vinteuil, my love had
alternated between the two of them, and consequently there had in fact
been only one love at a time. But there had been cases previously when I
had more or less fallen out with two of the girls. Whichever one of them
took the first steps to make amends was the one who would soothe my
spirits, and it would be the other one whom I would love if she was
still sulking, which did not mean that it might not be the first that I
would take up with permanently, for she would console me, however
imperfectly, for the harshness of the second, whom I would ultimately
forget if she never returned. And it did happen that, although I was
convinced that one or the other would return to me in the end, neither
of them did for quite a time. My anguish was therefore double, like my
love, ensuring that I should cease loving whichever one did return, but,
until she did, that I should suffer at the hands of both of them. This
is a fate which befalls us at a certain age, which may be relatively
young, where we may be less attracted by a person than by someone’s
rejection, where we ultimately know nothing more of the person we have
chosen, whose face has grown dim and whose soul has evaporated, than our
all too recent but none the less inexplicable choice itself: the fact is
that the only thing that could put an end to our suffering would be if
we could hear the words, ‘Could I come to see you?’ My separation from
Albertine the day when Françoise had said to me, ‘Mademoiselle Albertine
has left’ was like an allegory for so many other separations. For often
in order to discover that we are in love, even perhaps in order to fall
in love, the day of separation needs to arrive.

In these cases where it is waiting in vain or hearing a word of
rejection that determines our choice, our imagination, spurred on by
suffering, which sets to work so swiftly, creates with such speed a love
which was until then so inchoate and formless, and destined for months
past to remain only sketchy, that our intellect, which has lagged behind
our heart, is astonished and cries out: ‘You must be mad, what painful
new thoughts are you plunging us into? None of this is real life.’ And
indeed at that moment, if the faithless lady were not to relaunch her
pursuit, any distractions pleasant enough to bring physical peace to our
heart would be enough to abort this love. At all events, although this
life with Albertine was not in its essence necessary, it had become
indispensable for me. I had trembled when I was in love with Mme de
Guermantes because I thought that, with all the means of seduction at
her disposal, drawing not only on beauty but on situation and wealth,
she would be far too free to belong to far too many people and that I
would have far too little hold over her. Albertine was poor and obscure,
and ought to want to marry me. And yet I had not been able to possess
her exclusively. Whatever social conditions prevail, however wise the
precautions we take, we can never truly control another person’s life.
Why had she not said to me, ‘I am that way inclined’? I would have
yielded, I would have allowed her to indulge her inclinations. In a
novel which I had read, there was a woman whom no exhortation by the man
who loved her could persuade to speak. On reading it I had found this
situation absurd; I myself, I thought, would have first forced the woman
to speak, and then we would have come to an agreement. For what was the
point of such futile misery? But now I saw that we are not free not to
create this for ourselves and that, however well we know our own will,
other people do not obey it. And yet how many times, without knowing it
and without wishing it, have we uttered these painful and unavoidable
truths, which dominated us although we were blind to them – the truth of
our feelings, the truth of our destiny – in words which we no doubt
believed mendacious but which gained prophetic value retrospectively
after the event. I remembered many words which one or other of us had
uttered without at the time realizing the truth that they conveyed, even
words which we had exchanged believing that we were play-acting, but
whose falsehood was very flimsy, insubstantial and born of our pathetic
insincerity, compared to the implications which we failed to see in
them. Lies and misunderstandings which fell short of the profound
reality which we failed to see; beyond lay the truth, the truth of our
characters, whose essential laws had escaped us, since they need Time to
help them reveal themselves, as with the truth of our fate. I had
thought that I was lying when at Balbec I said, ‘The more I see you, the
more I shall love you’ (and yet it was this intimacy of every moment,
which, through jealousy, had attached me to her), ‘I feel that I could
help improve your mind’; or in Paris, ‘Try to be careful. Just imagine
if you had an accident, I would be heartbroken’ (and she said, ‘But an
accident could happen to me’); or in Paris, the evening when I had
pretended to want to leave her, saying, ‘Let me look at you once more,
because soon I shall not see you again, and it will be for ever’; and
she had said, when that same evening she had looked around her, ‘To
think that I shall never again see this room, these books, this pianola,
this whole house, I cannot believe it and yet it is true’; in her last
letters, finally, when, as she wrote, she probably thought to herself,
‘I am faking it’: _I leave you the best of myself_ (and was it not in
fact now to the faithfulness and the power of my memory, however
fragile, that her intelligence, her kindness and her beauty were
confided?) and: _That moment, with its twofold twilight (since night was
falling and since we were destined to part), will never be erased from
my mind until utter darkness finally invades it_, that phrase, written
the day before the day when indeed her mind had been invaded by utter
darkness and when, in those last fleeting glimmerings which anxiety
multiplies into infinity, she had perhaps had a vision of our last drive
together, and in that moment when everything abandons us and where we
construct a faith for ourselves, as atheists become Christians on the
battle-field, she had perhaps called for help from the friend whom she
had so often cursed but whom she had so respected, who himself – for all
religions are similar – had been cruel enough to wish that she herself
should also have the time to recognize herself, to give him her last
thoughts, to make her confession to him at last, to die within him. But
to what avail, since even if then she had had the time to recognize her
true self, both of us would have understood where our happiness lay and
what we should have done, only when, and only because, this happiness
was no longer possible and no longer attainable. As long as things are
possible, we defer them, and they can assume their power of attraction
and their apparent ease of accomplishment only when, projected into the
ideal void of the imagination, they are withdrawn from immersion in the
cloying, degrading morass of real life. The idea that we shall die is
more cruel than dying itself, but less cruel than the idea that someone
else is dead, than the idea that, when the waters of reality close after
having engulfed a person’s being, they smoothly, without so much as a
ripple, cover the spot from which that being is excluded, where neither
will nor knowledge exist any longer, and from which it is as difficult
to return to the idea of what that person’s being had experienced as it
is difficult, even while memories of their life are still fresh, to
think that this person is assimilable to the insubstantial images and
memories left by the characters of a novel that we have read.

At least I was happy that before her death she had written me this
letter and, above all, had sent that last telegram, which proved that
she would have returned to me if she had lived. It seemed to me that
this made things not only sweeter but also more beautiful, for the event
would have been incomplete without this telegram and would have been
less of a work of art and destiny. Yet, in fact, it would have been
these just as much if it had been different; for any event is a kind of
mould of a particular shape, and, whatever this may be, it imposes on
the series of incidents which it has come to interrupt a design which
seems conclusive and which we believe to be the only one possible,
because we do not know the alternative which might have taken its place.

Why had she not told me, ‘I do have those inclinations’? I would have
yielded, I would have let her indulge them, and even then I would still
have embraced her. How sad I felt to have to remember the way she had
lied to me, three days before she left me, swearing that she had never
had such a relationship with Mlle Vinteuil and her girl-friend, while
her own blushes confessed the opposite! Poor girl, at least she had been
honest enough not to wish to swear that the pleasure of seeing Mlle
Vinteuil and her girl-friend again had nothing to do with her desire to
go to the Verdurins’ that day. Why did she not follow through with a
complete confession rather than make up such an extravagant story?
Perhaps, incidentally, it might have been partly my fault if, despite
all my entreaties, which were repulsed by her firm denials, she had
never been prepared to tell me, ‘I do have those inclinations.’ Perhaps
it was partly my fault because at Balbec, the day when, after Mme de
Cambremer’s visit, I had had my first argument on this subject with
Albertine and when I was so far from believing that she could have had
anything but an over-passionate friendship with Andrée, that I had
expressed my disgust for this kind of behaviour too violently and
condemned it too categorically. I could not remember whether Albertine
had blushed when I had naïvely uttered my abhorrence of all that, I
could not remember, for often it is only long after the event that we
wish we could know what the attitude of some person had been, at a
moment when we were paying no attention to it at all, and which later,
when we think back over our conversation, would clear up a sensitive
problem. But there is a blank in our memory, no trace of it exists. And
how often have we not paid sufficient attention at the time to things
which could already have seemed important to us, have we not heard a
phrase or noticed a gesture correctly, or else have simply forgotten
them. And when later, eager to discover the truth, we proceed from
deduction to deduction, leafing through our memory like a dossier of
eye-witness accounts, we do reach this phrase or that gesture, there is
no way we can remember, we keep starting the same journey all over
again, but to no avail, for the path leads no further. Did she blush? I
don’t know if she did, but she could not have failed to have heard my
words, and the memory of them had brought her to a halt when she may
have been on the point of confessing to me. And now that she was nowhere
to be found, I could have roamed the earth from pole to pole without
meeting Albertine; reality had swallowed her up, formed a smooth surface
and erased every trace of the person who had drowned in its depths. She
was no more than a name, like a Mme de Charlus of whom those who had
known her said with an indifferent air, ‘She was delightful.’ But I
could not consider for more than a moment the existence of this reality
which Albertine no longer knew, for within me, where all my feelings and
my thoughts related to her life, my friend was only too alive. Perhaps
if she had known this, she might have been touched to see that her
friend had not forgotten her, now that her own life was finished, and
she would have appreciated things which previously had left her
indifferent. But as we would prefer to abstain from infidelity, however
secret, as long as we fear that the woman whom we love does not abstain,
I was afraid that if the dead live on somewhere, my grandmother would
know my forgetfulness as surely as Albertine my memories of her. And
when all is said and done, even in the case of this same dead woman, are
we sure that the joy we would have of learning that she knew certain
things would compensate for the terror of thinking that she knew them
_all_? And, however savage the sacrifice, would we not sometimes
renounce keeping them on after their death as friends, for fear of
having them also as judges?

My jealous curiosity about what Albertine might have done was infinite.
I paid who knows how many women, who taught me nothing. If my curiosity
was so lively, it is because people do not die immediately for us, they
remain bathed in a kind of aura of life which bears no relation to real
immortality but which continues to occupy our thoughts in the same way
as it did when they were alive. It is as if they had left on a voyage.
Theirs is a very pagan survival. Conversely, when we have ceased to be
in love, the curiosity aroused by the person we love dies even before
the person herself does. Thus I would no longer have taken a single step
to discover with whom Gilberte had gone for a walk on the Champs-Elysées
on such and such an evening. And yet, even if I felt that such moments
of curiosity were exactly similar, valueless in themselves and incapable
of lasting, I continued to sacrifice everything to the cruel
satisfaction of their passing pangs, despite knowing in advance that my
separation from Albertine, enforced by her death, would lead me to the
same state of indifference as had my intentional separation from
Gilberte. If Albertine had been able to tell what was going to happen,
she would have stayed by my side. But that was tantamount to saying
that, once she had seen herself dead, she would have preferred to stay
alive by my side. Through the very contradiction which it implied, such
a supposition was absurd. But that did not make it harmless, for as I
imagined how pleased Albertine, if she could know and retrospectively
understand, would be to return to me, I saw her by my side, I wanted to
embrace her, but alas it was impossible, she would never return, she was
dead. My imagination sought her in the skies, on evenings like those
when we were still able to gaze up at it together; I tried to wing my
affections towards her, beyond the moonlight that she loved, to console
her for no longer being alive, and this love for a person who had become
so remote was like a religion, my thoughts rose towards her like
prayers. Desire is so strong that it engenders belief; I had believed
that Albertine would not leave, because it was my desire; because this
was my desire, I believed that she was not dead; I started to read books
about turning tables, I started to believe in the possible immortality
of the soul. But that was not sufficient for me. I needed after her
death to be reunited with her body, as if eternity could resemble life.
Do I mean ‘life’? I was even more demanding. I would have liked not to
be deprived by death for ever more of those pleasures which death is not
alone in taking from us. For even without death they would finally have
withered, they had already started to do so through the action of
long-standing habit and new attractions. Then, in real life, Albertine,
even physically, would have gradually changed, and day by day I would
have adapted to this change. But my memory, evoking only moments from
her life, wanted to see her again in a certain guise that would no
longer have been hers even if she had still been alive; what it wanted
was a miracle to satisfy the natural, arbitrary limits of memory,
trapped in the past. And yet I imagined this living creature with all
the naïvety of the theologians of antiquity, granting me, not the
explanations which she could have offered, but, through a supreme
contradiction, those which she had always refused to give me while she
was alive. And thus her death was a kind of dream, my love would seem to
her an unexpected happiness; of death I retained only the usefulness and
optimism of an outcome which simplifies and settles everything.

Sometimes I did not imagine our reunion as far away as in another world.
Just as in former times when I knew Gilberte only as a playmate on the
Champs-Elysées, in the evenings at home I imagined that I would receive
a letter from her where she would admit that she loved me and that she
was about to come home, so a similar force of desire, taking no more
notice of the laws of physics which might prevent it than in the
previous case of Gilberte, when, actually, my desire had not been
mistaken because it did have the last word, led me now to believe that I
was about to receive a message from Albertine, telling me that she had
indeed had a riding accident, but that, like a character in some novel
(and as does sometimes happen after all in the case of people long
believed dead), she had not wanted me to learn that she had recovered
and was asking me contritely, now that she was better, to take her back
permanently. And, understanding perfectly well how people who otherwise
seem quite rational entertain certain harmless follies, I felt coexist
within me the certainty that she was dead, and the ceaseless hope of
seeing her walk through the door.

I had not yet received any news from Aimé, although he had surely
arrived in Balbec by now. No doubt my enquiry was directed at a
peripheral and arbitrarily chosen point. If Albertine’s life had really
been laden with guilt, it must have been full of far graver events which
chance had not let me encounter, as it had when Albertine had blushed
over the question of the bath-robe. But these were precisely the things
that did not exist in my eyes because I had not seen them. Yet it was
quite arbitrarily that I had marked out that particular day as
significant and, some years afterwards, was attempting to reconstruct
it. If Albertine had loved women, there were thousands of other days in
her life whose time-table had escaped me and yet which could be just as
interesting for me to know; I could have sent Aimé to many other places
in Balbec, to many other towns rather than Balbec. But precisely because
I had no knowledge of her time-table on those days, I could not picture
them in my imagination, they had no existence within it. People and
things started to exist for me only when they took on an individual
existence in my imagination. If there were thousands of others of the
same sort, they became for me merely typical of the rest. If, concerning
my suspicions about Albertine, I had for so long desired to know what
had happened in the showers, it was in the same way that, although I
knew that there were numerous young ladies or chambermaids who were
equally likely candidates and who could equally well have come to my
attention, those women whom I desired to meet – since it was those that
Saint-Loup had told me about, those who existed individually for me –
were the young ladies who frequented houses of ill fame, and Mme
Putbus’s chambermaid. The obstacles that my health, my indecision, my
‘procrastination’ as Saint-Loup called it, placed in my way when I tried
to accomplish anything had led me to delay from day to day, from month
to month, from year to year, the clarification of certain suspicions,
just as it had the accomplishment of certain desires. But I kept them in
my memory, promising not to forget to get to know the reality that lay
behind them, because they alone obsessed me (since the others could not
take shape before my eyes, and so had no existence) and also because the
very chance that had selected them from the real world was a guarantee
that it was indeed through them that I would be able to make contact
with a little of reality, a little of the real life that I coveted but
which eluded me. And again, would not one single little fact, if
carefully chosen, enable the experimenter to decide on the general law
which will make known the truth about thousands of analogous cases?
Although Albertine existed in my memory only in the states in which she
had appeared successively during her life, that is, subdivided into a
series of temporal fractions, my thoughts, restoring her unity,
reconstituted her as a person, and it is on this person that I wanted to
form an overall judgement, to know whether she had lied, whether she had
loved women, and whether it was in order to be free to frequent them
that she had left me. What the bath-house girl had to say might resolve
once and for all my doubts over Albertine’s morals.

My doubts! Alas, I had thought that I would be indifferent, even
pleased, at the prospect of never seeing Albertine again, until her
departure revealed my mistake. Similarly, her death had taught me how
mistaken I was occasionally to believe that I would welcome her death
and to suppose that it would liberate me. It happened the same way when,
on receiving Aimé’s letter, I understood that, if I had not so far
suffered too cruelly from my doubts over Albertine’s virtue, it was
because in fact they were not really doubts. My happiness and my life
needed Albertine to be virtuous, thus they had posited once for all that
she was. Armed with this salutary faith, I could safely allow my mind to
play sadly with the suppositions which it formulated without believing
in them. I thought, ‘Perhaps she does love women,’ as one thinks, ‘I
might die during the night’; we say the words to ourselves, but we do
not believe them, we make plans for the morrow. This explains how, in
mistakenly believing myself to be uncertain as to whether Albertine
loved women or not and consequently believing that a guilty act proven
against Albertine would add nothing to what I had often envisaged, I
came, once faced with the images elicited by Aimé’s letter, which others
would have found insignificant, to experience an unexpected suffering,
the most cruel that I had yet experienced and which, alas, formed with
these images, with the image of Albertine herself, into a sort of
precipitate, as one says in chemistry, where everything was indivisible
and of which the text of Aimé’s letter, which I have laid out in a
purely conventional fashion, can give no idea, since each of the words
that composed it was immediately transformed and coloured for ever by
the suffering that it had just induced.

‘_Dear Monsieur_,

‘_Would Monsieur please forgive me for not having written to Monsieur
sooner. The person that Monsieur had requested me to see had taken her
leave for two days, and, wishing to respond to the confidence that
Monsieur had placed in me, I did not want to return empty-handed. I have
just had a chat at last with that person who remembers all quite clearly
(Mlle A.)_’

Aimé, who had a certain smattering of education, wanted to place Mlle A.
in italics or between inverted commas. But when he wanted to use
inverted commas he drew brackets, and when he wanted to put something in
brackets he used inverted commas. Similarly, Françoise would say that
someone was waiting in the same street as me when she meant that he was
resident there, but that someone could reside, rather than wait, for a
minute or two, since the mistakes made by simple people consist most
often in exchanging terms – as the French language itself has done –
which over the centuries have changed places with each other.

_‘According to her, what Monsieur had suspected is absolutely certain.
Firstly, it was she who looked after (Mlle A.) whenever the latter came
to the bath-house. (Mlle A.) very often came to take a shower
accompanied by a tall woman older than herself, dressed always in grey,
and whom the bath-house girl without knowing her name knew of as a
result of often having seen her on the look-out for girls. But she paid
no more attention to the others after she had got to know (Mlle A.). She
and (Mlle A.) always locked themselves in the cabin, stayed inside a_
_long time, and the lady in grey gave the lady with whom I had this chat
a tip of at least ten francs. As the latter person said to me, you can
guess that if they had spent their time making daisy chains they
wouldn’t have given me a ten-franc tip. (Mlle A.) also used to go there
sometimes with a very dark-skinned woman, who wore a lorgnette. But most
often (Mlle A.) came with girls younger than her, especially a very
red-haired one. Except for the lady in grey, the persons that_ _(Mlle
A.) habitually brought along with her were not from Balbec and often
must have come from quite far away. They never went in together, but
(Mlle A.) went in, telling me to leave the cabin door unlocked, that she
was expecting a friend, and the person with whom I have spoken knew what
that meant. That person was unable to give me further details owing to
her not remembering very well, “which_ _is easy to understand after so
long”. Besides, this person did not attempt to find out, because she is
very discreet and because it was in her interest, for (Mlle A.) brought
her in lots of money. She was very sincerely moved by the news of her
death. It is true that in one so young it is a great mishap both for her
and her family. I await Monsieur’s orders to know if I may leave Balbec
where I am_ _unlikely to learn no more. I wish to thank Monsieur again
for the little outing that he has thus procured me and which I have
found very pleasant all the more because the weather is more than
favourable. The signs are good for this year’s season. We hope that
Monsieur will put in a brief apparition._

‘_I can’t think of anything else of interest to tell Monsieur, etc.’_

To understand how deeply the words struck home, one should remember that
the questions I had to put to myself about Albertine were not
peripheral, unimportant questions, those questions of detail which are
the only kind that we really ask ourselves concerning any person other
than ourselves, thereby allowing ourselves, clad in waterproof thought,
to wade through suffering, lies, vice and death. No, as regards
Albertine, it was a question of essence: who was she deep down, what
were her thoughts, whom did she love, had she lied to me, had my life
with her been as lamentable as that of Swann with Odette? Thus the
target struck by Aimé’s reply, although it responded not in general but
in specific terms – and precisely for that reason – was indeed the inner
self, both Albertine’s and my own.

At last, in Albertine walking with the lady in grey down the little
street that led to the bath-house, I saw before my eyes a fragment of
that past which seemed to me no less mysterious and terrifying than I
had feared when I imagined it enclosed within Albertine’s eyes and
within her memories. Of course anyone other than I might have found
those details, which, since Albertine’s death, made it impossible for me
to have her refute them, thus endowing them with what amounted to a
likelihood of probability, quite insignificant. It is even probable that
in Albertine’s eyes, her own misdeeds, even if they were true, and if
she had admitted them – whether in her conscience she found them
innocent or blameworthy, whether in her sensual being she found them
delightful or bland – would have been divested of that ineffable
impression of horror of which I was unable to rid them.

Helped by my own love of women, and notwithstanding the fact that they
were unlikely to have meant the same to Albertine, I was able to imagine
something of what she had felt. And it was certainly already enough to
trigger my suffering to imagine her desiring as I had so often desired,
lying to me as I had so often lied to her, preoccupied with this girl or
that, and incurring expenses on her behalf, as I had for Mlle de
Stermaria and so many other young ladies, or for the village girls whom
I met in the country. Of course, all my desires helped me to some extent
to understand hers; it already caused me great suffering to have all my
desires turned into torments, and the more intense the former, the more
cruel the latter, as if in the algebra of the senses they reappeared
with the same coefficient, but governed by a minus instead of a plus
sign. But in Albertine’s eyes, as far as I could judge for myself,
however hard she had tried to hide her own misdeeds from me – which led
me to believe that she felt that she was guilty or was afraid of hurting
me – because she had nurtured them to suit her taste in the spotlight of
the imagination where desire takes shape, they seemed to her none the
less to be things of the same nature as the rest of life, pleasures for
her, which she had felt unable to deny herself, pains for me, but which
she had tried to prevent from hurting me by hiding them, yet pains and
pleasures which could take their place among life’s other pains and
pleasures. But in my case it was from outside, without warning, without
being able to elaborate the images myself, it was from Aimé’s letter
that I had received these images of Albertine going into the showers and
preparing her tip.

It was obviously because I interpreted Albertine’s calculated and silent
encounter with the lady in grey as a meeting which they had planned, a
convention of going to make love in a shower cabin, which indicated an
experience of corruption and the carefully dissimulated organization of
a whole double life, it was because these images brought me the terrible
news of Albertine’s guilt that they had immediately caused me a physical
pain which would accompany them for evermore. But these images had
immediately been affected by my pain; an objective fact or an image is
different according to the state of mind in which one approaches it. And
pain is as powerful a modifier of reality as is intoxication. Combining
with these images, my suffering had immediately turned them into
something absolutely different from what for any other person would be a
lady in grey, a tip, a shower, or the street which Albertine and the
lady in grey used for their calculated encounter – a glimpse of a life
of lies and misdeeds of a kind that I had never envisaged –; my
suffering had immediately eaten into their very substance, I no longer
saw them in the light which illuminates earthly visions, it was a
fragment of another world, an unknown planet of the damned, a vision of
Hell. This Hell comprised the whole of Balbec and all its neighbouring
villages where, according to Aimé’s letter, she often found younger
girls to take into the showers. How everything connected with Balbec now
became fearfully permeated with that mystery which I had formerly
imagined in and around Balbec, but which had dissolved while I was
living there, which I had tried to grasp on a later occasion when I got
to know Albertine because, as I saw her pass by on the beach, being mad
enough to hope that she was not virtuous, I thought that she must be the
embodiment of this mystery! The names of those stations, Toutainville,
Épreville, Incarville …, which had become so familiar, so reassuring,
when I heard them in the evening on my return from the Verdurins’, but,
now that I thought that Albertine had lived in one, walked to another
and ridden her bicycle to a third, aroused an anxiety in me more cruel
than the first time, when I had felt so disturbed on seeing them from
the small local railway with my grandmother, before we arrived in
Balbec, which I had yet to get to know.

One of the effects of jealousy is to make us discover how far the
reality of external events and the sentiments of the soul are levied in
unknown quantities which lend themselves to thousands of different
interpretations. We think that we have an accurate knowledge of what
things are in the world outside and what people think within themselves,
for the simple reason that we are not directly concerned. But as soon as
we acquire the urge to know, as the jealous person does, then they
become a vertiginous kaleidoscope where we cannot recognize a thing. Had
Albertine deceived me? With whom? In whose house? On which day? The day
when she had made such and such a remark, and when I remembered having
made some reply or other during the day? I had no idea. I had no better
idea of what her feelings were for me, whether they were inspired by
self-interest or affection. And suddenly I recalled a trivial incident,
for instance that Albertine had wanted to go to Saint-Martin-le-Vêtu,
saying that she found the name interesting, but perhaps quite simply
because she had met up with some girl from the village. But what Aimé
had learned from the bath-house girl was of little importance, since
Albertine would for evermore be unaware that he had told me about it and
since, during the period of my love for Albertine, my need to know was
always surpassed by the need to show her that I knew; for this broke
down between us the barrier raised by our separate illusions, without
ever resulting in making her love me more, on the contrary. Yet now that
she was dead, the second of these requirements had in fact become fused
with the effects of the first: to imagine the conversation in which I
would have tried to let her know what I had learned, as vividly as the
conversation in which I would have asked her to tell me what I did not
know; that is, I needed to see her by my side and to hear her answering
kindly, to see her cheeks fill out, her eyes lose their mischief and
fill with sadness, that is, to love her still and forget my jealous rage
in the despair of my solitude. The painful mystery of the impossibility
of ever letting her know what I had learned and of establishing a new
relationship based on the truth which I had only just discovered (and
which I might perhaps have been able to discover only because she was
dead) substituted its sadness for the more painful mystery of her
conduct. How ever could I have wished so much that Albertine should know
what I had heard about the shower room, when Albertine no longer
existed! This was yet another of the consequences of our finding it
impossible, when we have to analyse death, to imagine it in terms other
than those of life. Albertine no longer existed; but for me she was the
person who had hidden the fact that she had made assignations with women
at Balbec, who thought she had managed to prevent me from finding out.
When we try to figure out what will happen after our death, are we not
mistakenly still projecting the image of our living selves which we have
at that moment? And in the end is it much more ridiculous to regret that
a woman who no longer exists is unaware that we have found out what she
was doing six years earlier, than to wish that the public should still
speak well of us in a century’s time, when we ourselves are dead? If
there is more real foundation to the latter case than the former, the
regrets of my retrospective jealousy proceeded none the less from the
very same perspectival error as in other men the desire for posthumous
fame. And yet, if this impression of the solemn and definitive side of
my separation from Albertine had been substituted momentarily for the
notion of her misdeeds, it only aggravated these by conferring an
irremediable character on them. I saw myself lost in life as if I were
alone, on a boundless shore where, whichever direction I took, I would
never meet her. Luckily I came across something extremely apposite in my
memory – as there are always all kinds of things, some dangerous, others
salutary, in this dark cupboard where memories can only be brought to
light one by one – I discovered, like a workman finding the right tool
for his job, one of my grandmother’s sayings. Commenting on an
incredible story that the bath-house girl had told to Mme de
Villeparisis, she had said to me, ‘That woman must have caught lying
sickness.’ This memory was a great comfort to me. How much credit could
I give to what the bath-house girl had told Aimé? Especially since in
fact she had never seen anything. A girl can go to take a shower with
her friends without having bad intentions. Perhaps the bath-house girl
was exaggerating the amount of her tip in order to show off. After all I
had once heard Françoise argue that Aunt Léonie said in her presence
that she had ‘a million a month to burn’, which was quite absurd;
another time she had seen my aunt Léonie give Eulalie four
thousand-franc notes, when a fifty-franc note folded in four seemed to
me already implausible enough. And thus I sought to discard, and
gradually succeeded in discarding, the hurtful knowledge that I had
taken so much trouble to acquire, buffeted as I was between the desire
to know and the fear of suffering. Then my affections were able to
revive, but so too, instantly accompanying these affections, was a
sadness at being separated from Albertine, which perhaps made me even
more unhappy than I had been during those recent hours when it had been
jealousy that was torturing me. But this latter feeling itself did
suddenly revive when I thought of Balbec, because of an image (which
until then had never made me suffer and even seemed to be one of the
most innocuous in my memory) which I suddenly revisualized, that of the
dining-room in the evening, where, on the other side of the glass,
Balbec crowded its whole population into the twilight, as if they were
watching strange, glowing creatures moving past the illuminated glass of
an aquarium, and (although I had never thought of it in these terms
before) brought a whole medley of fisher-girls, working-girls and
middle-class girls into close contact with each other, through their
envy for this new luxury, a luxury which at least thrift and
conservatism, if not wealth, prohibited their parents from enjoying, and
among these middle-class girls almost every evening one could surely
find Albertine, whom I had not yet met and who would no doubt pick up
some little girl there and go to join her a few minutes later in the
dark, on the sand or in an empty bathing cabin at the foot of the
cliffs. Then my sadness revived, as I had just heard the lift, sounding
like a sentence of exile as it continued to rise instead of stopping at
my floor. Yet the only person whose visit I could have wished for would
never again return, since she was dead. And despite that, when the lift
did stop at my floor my heart fluttered, for a moment I thought, ‘What
if all this were only a dream! Perhaps she is here, she’s going to ring,
she has come home, Françoise will come in to say, more in fear than in
anger, for she is even more superstitious than she is vindictive, and
would be less afraid of the living woman than a woman she might perhaps
believe to be a ghost, “Monsieur will never guess who is here.” ’ I
tried to think of nothing, to pick up the newspaper. But I found it
insufferable to read all those articles written by people who felt no
real pain. One said of a trivial song: ‘It brings _tears to the eyes_’
whereas I myself would have listened to it so joyfully if Albertine had
been alive. Another, for all that he was a well-known writer, said that
he had received _unforgettable_ tokens of esteem, because he had been
applauded as he got off a train, whereas I myself, if I had been so
applauded, would not have given it a moment’s thought. And a third
argued that, without its tedious politics, life in Paris would be
‘absolutely delicious’, whereas I knew that even without politics life
could only be odious for me, but would have seemed delicious, even with
the politics, if I had Albertine back. The field sports correspondent
(it was the month of May) said, ‘This season is truly miserable, not to
say calamitous, for the real hunter, since there is nothing, absolutely
nothing, worth potting’ and the Salon critic: ‘Faced with this manner of
arranging an exhibition one feels seized by deep discouragement, by
infinite sadness.’ If the strength of my own feelings made the
expressions of those who felt neither real happiness nor real
misfortunes seem mendacious and bland, on the other hand, the most
insignificant lines which could be related however tenuously to
Normandy, or Touraine,²⁴ or hydrotherapy, or la Berma, or the Princesse
de Guermantes, or love, or absence, or infidelity, abruptly placed the
image of Albertine before my eyes without leaving me time to turn away,
and would start me weeping again. Besides, more often than not, I could
not even read the newspapers, for the simple act of turning the pages
reminded me both that I had performed the same action while Albertine
was alive and that she was no longer alive; I dropped them back down
again without having the strength to unfold all the pages. Each
impression evoked an identical, but damaged, impression, in that
Albertine’s existence had been torn away from it, so that I never felt
brave enough to live to the full these mutilated moments which lay
bleeding in my heart. Even when she gradually ceased to be present in my
thoughts and all-powerful in my heart, I felt a sudden pang if I had to
go into her room, light a lamp and sit down beside the pianola as I used
to do when she had been there. Divided into diverse divinities of hearth
and home, she long inhabited a candle flame, a doorknob, or the back of
a chair, and other less material domains, such as a sleepless night, or
the emotions evoked by the first visit of some woman who had attracted
me. In spite of this, the few sentences that my eyes read during a day,
or that my thoughts remembered having read, often excited cruel jealousy
within me. In order to do this, they needed less to provide me with
evidence proving the immorality of women than to bring back impressions
formerly linked to Albertine’s life. As they were then transported into
a forgotten moment whose force had not been blunted by the habit of
thinking about it, a moment where Albertine still lived on, her misdeeds
assumed a more intimate, agonizing and tragic character. Then I started
once again to wonder whether I could be sure that the bath-house girl’s
allegations were false. A good way to find out would be to send Aimé to
Touraine, to spend a few days in the neighbourhood of Mme Bontemps’s
villa. If Albertine liked the kind of pleasures that women enjoy
together, the reason that she had left me would have been in order to be
deprived of them no longer, and the minute that she was free she must
have sought to indulge in them, and succeeded, in a neighbourhood that
she knew and where she would not have decided to return if she had not
thought that she would find more opportunities there than she would have
if she had continued to live here with me. I do not claim that there was
anything extraordinary in the fact that Albertine’s death had changed so
few of my preoccupations. While our mistresses are alive, a large number
of the thoughts which go to make up what we call our love come to us at
times when they are not by our sides. Thus we get into the habit of
focussing our day-dreams on an absent object, and even if she is absent
only for a few hours, she is during those hours no more than a memory.
Thus death changes very little. When Aimé had returned, I asked him to
leave for Châtellerault, and thus it was not only through my thoughts,
my sadness and the emotion that I felt on encountering any name linked
however tenuously with a certain person, but again through all my
actions, through all the enquiries I undertook, through the use that I
made of my money, devoting it entirely to learning of Albertine’s
activities, I can say that during that whole year my life continued to
be filled with love, with a real relationship. But the object of this
relationship was dead. People sometimes say that something of a person
may live on after their death, if that person was an artist and placed
something of himself in his work. It is perhaps in this way that a kind
of cutting taken from a person and grafted on to another person’s heart
continues to live on when the person from whom it has been detached has
perished.

Aimé went to take lodgings near to Mme Bontemps’s villa; he became
acquainted with a chambermaid and a man from whom Albertine often hired
a car for the day. These two people had noticed nothing. In a second
letter, Aimé told me that a young laundry-maid from the town had told
him that Albertine had a special way of squeezing her arm when she
brought her linen back. ‘But’, he said, ‘this young lady had never done
anything more than that with her.’ I sent Aimé the money which paid for
his trip and which also purchased the ill that his letter had just
caused me, although I was struggling to cure this by telling myself that
she had merely shown a sign of affection which proved no immoral intent,
when I received a telegram from Aimé, saying: ‘HAVE LEARNED MOST
INTERESTING THINGS. HAVE LOTS OF NEWS FOR MONSIEUR. LETTER FOLLOWS.’ The
next day I received a letter whose envelope was enough to make me
tremble; I knew that it was from Aimé, for everyone, however humble, is
a master of those familiar little household creatures whose life lies as
it were suspended on the paper, that is, the unique characters of his
handwriting which he alone possesses.

_‘At first the young laundry-maid didn’t want to tell me a thing, she
assured me that Mlle Albertine had never done more than pinch her arm.
But to get her to talk I took her out to dinner and plied her with
drink. Then she told me that Mlle Albertine often met her on the banks
of the Loire when she went bathing; that Mlle Albertine, who rose early
in the morning to bathe, used to meet her on the riverside_ _at a place
where the woods are so thick that no one can see you, and besides
there’s no one about to see you so early in the morning. Then the
laundry-maid brought her girl-friends and they went for a dip, and
afterwards, as it was already very hot out there and you could feel the
heat beating down even under the trees, they stayed in the grass to dry
one another, to tickle and caress one another and play_ _games together.
The young laundry-maid confessed that she enjoyed playing games with her
girl-friends, and that when she saw that Mlle Albertine kept rubbing up
against her in her bath-robe, she got her to take it off and caressed
her by running her tongue down her neck and her arms, and even down the
soles of her feet when Mlle Albertine stretched them out towards her.
The laundry-maid also_ _got undressed, and they played around, pushing
one another into the water. That evening she told me nothing more. But
dedicated as always to your service and ready to do anything to please
you, I took the young laundry-maid home to bed with me. She asked me if
I wanted her to do to me what she did to Mlle Albertine_ _when the
latter removed her bathing-dress. And she said: (If you could have seen
how she quivered, that young lady, she said: (Oh! I’m in heaven) and she
got so excited that she could not help biting me.) I could still see the
mark on the young laundry-maid’s arm. And I understood Mlle Albertine’s
enjoyment, for the young wench is really very talented.’_

I had suffered badly enough in Balbec when Albertine had told me of her
friendship with Mlle Vinteuil. But Albertine had been there to console
me. Yet later, after I had managed to drive Albertine away from me by
trying to find out too much about her activities, and Françoise had
announced that she was no longer at home, and I found myself all alone,
I had suffered more. But at least the Albertine whom I had loved
remained in my heart. Now what I found in her place – punishing me for
having pushed my curiosity too far and contradicting my supposition that
death should have put an end to this curiosity – was a different young
lady, multiplying lies and deceit in just those cases where she had so
gently reassured me by swearing that she had never tasted those
pleasures which, intoxicated with regaining the freedom that she had
left me in order to savour, she had in fact indulged to the point of
swooning, to the extent of biting the young laundry-maid whom she met at
sunrise on the banks of the Loire and to whom she declared, ‘I’m in
heaven.’ A different Albertine, and not only in the sense in which we
employ the term when referring to other people. When other people turn
out to be different from what we had imagined, this difference usually
does not affect us deeply, and since the diviner’s wand of our intuition
is unable to produce surface movements greater than the inner swings
which it detects, it is only on the skin of other people’s lives that we
are able to situate these differences. In former times when I learned
that one woman loved other women, this did not seem to me to make her a
different woman, a woman of a different essence. But when it comes to
concern a woman whom we love ourselves, we need, in order to rid
ourselves of the pain caused by the idea that it may be true, to find
out not only what she has done, but also what she felt when she did it
and what she was thinking about while she was doing it; then wading
further out we enter deeper into our pain until we reach that mysterious
essence. I suffered in the very depths of my being, in my body as well
as my heart, much more than I would have done from the fear of losing my
own life, from this curiosity which drew on all the united forces of my
intellect and my unconscious mind; and in this way I projected into the
very depths of Albertine’s own being everything that I now learned about
her. And the pain which had thus so deeply driven home the truth about
Albertine’s vice did much later render me one last service. Like the
harm that I had caused my grandmother, the harm that Albertine had
caused me was a last link between her and me and one link which survived
even her memory, for, following the law of conservation of energy that
is the law of all physics, suffering need not even be instructed by
memory in order to function: thus a man who has forgotten the enchanted
nights he had spent in the woods beneath the moonlight still suffers
from the rheumatism which he contracted there.

These tastes which, despite her denials, she had, these tastes which
were at last revealed to me, not through cold reasoning but through the
searing anguish that I felt on reading the words, ‘I’m in heaven,’ a
suffering which gave them a special quality, these tastes did not merely
accrue to my image of Albertine as the hermit crab acquires a new shell
that it drags along behind it, but rather as one salt which comes into
contact with another changes not only that salt’s colour, but even its
nature. Whereas the young laundry-maid must have said to her
girl-friends, ‘Just imagine, who’d have thought it, d’you know that
she’s one too?’, for me it was not merely a vice which they initially
failed to suspect, which they then added into Albertine’s character, but
the discovery that she was a different person, a person like them,
speaking the same language, making her the compatriot of strangers,
making her even more foreign to me, proving that what I had known of
her, what I harboured in my heart, was no more than a tiny fragment of
her, and that the remainder, which took on such dimensions not only for
already being that so mysterious and important thing, individual desire,
but also for her sharing it with others, which she had always hidden
from me, keeping me away from it, as a woman might have hidden from me
the fact that she was an enemy spy, yet more treacherously than such a
spy, who deceives only regarding her nationality, whereas Albertine
deceived me regarding the nature of her deepest being, in that she did
not belong to the common race of humanity, but to an alien breed that
intermingles with it and hides within it, but never entirely fuses with
it. As it happened I had seen two paintings by Elstir with naked women
in a thickly wooded landscape. In one of them one of the girls raises
her foot as Albertine must have done when she stretched it out towards
the laundry-maid. With her other foot, she is pushing the other girl,
who is raising one leg in the air and playfully protesting, and just
skimming the surface of the blue water with her other foot as she falls.
Now I remembered that the line of her raised thigh made the same sinuous
swan’s-neck of a curve against the angle of her knee that Albertine’s
thigh did when she lay beside me on the bed, and I had often wished that
I could tell her that she reminded me of these paintings. But I had not
done so, in order to avoid awakening within her visions of naked female
figures. Now I saw her, along with the laundry-maid and her friends,
recomposing the group that I had so admired when I took my place amid
Albertine’s girl-friends at Balbec. And if I had been a connoisseur
responding to beauty alone, I would have acknowledged that Albertine
recomposed this group a thousand times more beautifully now that its
elements were statues of nude goddesses like those which great sculptors
scattered around Versailles, whether planting them among the groves or
leaving them to be washed and polished by the watery caress of the
fountains. As I saw her now beside the laundry-maid, I saw her in terms
of those girls at the water’s edge, whose nude forms were reduplicated
in feminine marble amid the bushes and undergrowth and steeped in water
like some marine bas-relief. Remembering what she had been like on my
bed, I thought that I recognized the line of her thigh. As I visualized
it, it became the neck of a swan, seeking the other girl’s mouth. Then I
no longer saw even a thigh, but the bold neck of a swan, like the one in
a sketch I knew where it tremulously seeks out Leda’s mouth as she
openly yields to the spasms of female desire, and where, because it is
only a swan, she seems more alone, just as we discover over the
telephone the inflexions of a voice that we do not notice until we are
able to detach it from the face which for us gives its expressions their
concrete form. In this study, pleasure, instead of being directed at the
woman who inspires it but who is absent and replaced by a motionless
swan, is focussed within the woman who feels it. There were moments when
communications between my heart and my memory were cut. What Albertine
had done with the laundry-maid was no longer signified by anything more
than an almost algebraic shorthand which meant nothing to me: yet a
hundred times an hour the current was restored and my heart was scorched
by a hellish and pitiless fire as I saw Albertine brought truly back to
life by my jealousy, stretching out beneath the caresses of the young
laundry-maid, telling her, ‘I’m in heaven.’ As she was alive at the
moment when she committed her misdeed, that is to say at the moment
where I now found myself, I was not content merely to learn of this
misdeed, I would have liked her to know that I knew. In this way,
although in such moments I felt regret at the thought that I would never
see her again, this regret was informed by my jealousy and quite
different from the heart-rending regret which I felt in the moments when
I loved her; it was the regret that I was not able to say to her: ‘You
thought that I would never know what you did after you left me, and yet
I know everything, the laundry-maid on the banks of the Loire, you told
her, “I’m in heaven,” I saw the love bite.’ Of course I also thought:
‘Why torture myself? The girl who took her pleasure with the
laundry-maid exists no more and therefore is not a person whose actions
have retained any import. She cannot tell herself that I know. But nor
can she tell herself that I do not know, since she cannot tell herself
anything at all.’ But I was less convinced by this argument than by my
visions of her pleasure, which brought me back to the moment when she
had experienced it. Nothing exists for us but what we feel, and we
project this into the past, as into the future, without allowing
ourselves to be restrained by the fictitious barrier of death. If at
such moments my regret that she was dead was subject to the influence of
my jealousy and took this particular form, this influence extended
naturally to my dreams of the occult and the immortal, which were no
more than an attempt to put my desires into practice. Thus at such
moments, if I had been able to invoke her by turning a table, as
Bergotte believed was possible, or to meet her in another life, as the
Abbé X*** would have it, I would have wished to do so only in order to
be able to repeat to her, ‘I know about the laundry maid. You said: “I’m
in heaven”; I saw the bite.’ What I fell back on to help me fight
against this image of the laundry-maid, was, admittedly after it had
been there for some time, this image itself, because we only really take
cognizance of something which is new, something which abruptly
introduces a change of tone that strikes our sensibility, something that
habit has not yet replaced with its pale replicas. But it was above all
this fracturing of Albertine into many parts, into many Albertines,
which constituted her sole mode of existence within me. Moments recurred
when she had been nothing but kind, or intelligent, or serious, or even
a lover of sport above all. And was it not right that this fragmentation
should soothe me? For although in itself it was quite unreal, although
it depended on the successive forms of the hours when it appeared to me,
forms which remained those of my memory, as the curves in the images
projected by the magic lantern depended on the curves of its coloured
slides, did it not in its way represent a perfectly objective truth,
which is the fact that none of us is a single being, for we are
constituted of many people who do not all have the same moral qualities,
and the fact that if the immoral Albertine had indeed existed, this did
not preclude the existence of others, like the one who liked to chat
about Saint-Simon in her room; the one who, on the evening when I had
told her that we should part, had said with such sadness, ‘To think that
I shall never see this pianola and this room, again’ and who, when she
had seen what an emotional shock my own deceit had finally given me, had
cried out in such sincere pity, ‘Oh, no, anything rather than upset you,
I agree, I shall not try to see you again!’? Then I was no longer alone.
Once this kindly Albertine had returned, I had won back the only person
whom I could ask for the antidote to the suffering caused by Albertine.
Of course I did still want to discuss the affair of the laundry-maid
with her, but no longer in the mode of a cruel triumph making a vicious
display of the fact that I was in the know. As I would have done while
Albertine was alive, I asked her tenderly whether the laundry-maid
affair was true. She swore that it was not, that Aimé was not very
truthful and that because he wanted to appear worthy of the wages that I
paid him, he had not wanted to return empty-handed and had got the
laundry-maid to say whatever he wanted. Of course Albertine had told me
a string of lies. And yet in the ebb and flow of her contradictory
statements, I felt that there had been a certain progress, thanks to my
efforts. I could not have sworn that she did not confide in me even at
the start (involuntarily, perhaps, in a phrase that slipped out): I
could no longer remember. And then, she had such odd ways of referring
to certain things that they might be significant, or they might not be.
But her sense of my jealousy had led her afterwards to retract in horror
what she had at first complaisantly admitted. Actually, Albertine had
not even needed to say this to me. For me to be persuaded of her
innocence it was enough for me to be able to kiss her, and now I could,
now that the wall which had separated us, that invisible but intractable
wall which rises between two lovers who have quarrelled and which kisses
cannot breach, had fallen. No, she had no need to tell me anything. She
might have done whatever she wished, poor girl, there were feelings
which could unite us, beyond whatever divided us. If the affair were
true, if Albertine had hidden her inclinations from me, it was in order
to spare my grief. I had had the sweet pleasure of hearing this
Albertine say so herself. Besides, had I ever known a different
Albertine? The two main causes of misunderstanding in a relationship
with another person are either that we ourselves are kind-hearted, or
else that we are in love with the other person. We fall in love with a
smile, the look in someone’s eyes, a shoulder. That is enough; then
during the long hours of hope or sadness, we create a person, we compose
a character. And later, when we come to know better the person we love,
we can no more, whatever cruel realities confront us, detach this kind
disposition, this amorous feminine nature, from the person who has that
look, or that shoulder, than we can remove her youth from a woman who
has grown older but whom we have known since she was young. I called to
mind the beautiful, kind, compassionate eyes of this Albertine, her
plump cheeks and her neck with its grainy texture. It was the image of a
dead woman, but since this dead woman was still alive, it was easy for
me to do immediately what I would not have failed to do during her
lifetime if she had still been by my side (and what I would do if I were
ever to meet her again in another life), I forgave her.

The moments which I had spent in the company of this Albertine were so
precious to me that I wished I had never forgotten a single one of them.
Yet sometimes, as one comes across the remnants of a squandered fortune,
I retrieved some which I thought I had lost: tying a scarf behind my
neck instead of in front, I remembered a drive which I had never since
recalled, when Albertine had kissed me and then arranged my scarf in
this fashion to prevent the cold air from chilling my throat. So simple
a drive, restored to my memory by so humble a gesture, gave me the
pleasure afforded by those personal possessions which have belonged to
someone we have dearly loved and which are priceless when they are
brought to us by her old maidservant; my sorrow was enriched by this,
all the more since I had never thought of this scarf again.

Now Albertine, once more set free, resumed her flight; men and women
followed in her wake. She was alive within me. I realized that my vast,
protracted love for her was as it were the ghost of the feelings that I
had felt for her, reproducing their diverse phases and obeying the same
laws as the emotional reality which it reflected beyond her death. For I
understood plainly that if I had been able to insert some intervals
between my thoughts of Albertine, and had these lasted too long, I would
have ceased to love her; this interruption would have made me
indifferent to her, as I had now become towards my grandmother. Too long
a time spent not thinking of her would have broken in my memory the
continuity which is the very principle of life, although it may
sometimes be reconstituted even after it has lapsed for some time. Had
this not been the case with my love for Albertine while she was alive,
which had been able to pick up the threads where they had left off after
long periods of not thinking of her? At all events my memory must have
been subject to the same laws and equally unable to withstand extended
intervals, for after Albertine’s death it did no more than reflect, like
the aurora borealis, the emotions that I had felt for her, as if it were
merely the shadow of my love.

On other occasions my sorrow took on so many forms that sometimes I did
not recognize it; I wished I could have a great love, or I wanted to
find someone to live with me, which seemed to me to be a sign that I was
no longer in love with Albertine when it was a sign that I was still in
love with her; for this need to experience a great love, just like my
desire to kiss Albertine’s plump cheeks, was only a part of my regret.
Only when I had forgotten her would I be able to realize that I would be
wiser and happier living without love. Thus missing Albertine, because
that was what gave rise within me to the need for a sister, made that
need impossible to assuage. And as I came gradually to feel the lack of
Albertine less acutely, this need for a sister, which was only an
unconscious expression of my need for her, would make it less imperious.
And yet these two remainders of my love did not diminish with equal
speed. There were hours when the former suffered such a total eclipse,
while the latter on the other hand so maintained its full strength, that
I decided to get married. And on the other hand, later on, when my
jealous memories had died down, from time to time a surge of affection
for Albertine welled up suddenly in my heart, and then, thinking of my
loves for other women, I told myself that she would have understood and
shared them, and her vice became almost a source of love. Sometimes my
jealousy revived in the moments when I no longer remembered Albertine,
although she was then the cause of my jealousy. I thought that I was
jealous of Andrée because I had just learned of an affair she had had.
But Andrée for me was only a accommodation address, a relay, a socket
wiring me directly into Albertine. Thus it is in our dreams that we lend
a different face or name to someone whose identity we have none the less
perfectly well grasped. In short, despite the ebb and flow contradicting
this general law in these individual cases, the sentiments left in me by
Albertine found it more difficult to die than did the sentiment of their
original cause. Not only the sentiments, but the sensations. Differing
in this from Swann, who, when he had started falling out of love with
Odette, had not even been able to revive within himself the sensation of
his love, I felt myself still reliving a past that was no more than
another man’s story; as if my self were divided into two, while its
upper half was already hard and cold, its lower half rekindled every
time that a spark passed the old current back through it, even when my
mind had long since ceased to think of Albertine. Since no image of her
ever came to supplement the cruel palpitations that accompanied this
phenomenon, or the tears brought to my eyes by a cold wind like the one
which had blown through the prematurely pink apple trees at Balbec, I
was led to wonder whether the rebirth of my pain was not due to entirely
pathological causes and whether what I took to be the revival of a
memory and the last phase of a love affair might not be rather the onset
of a cardiac disease.

In certain ailments there are secondary infections which the patient is
only too tempted to confuse with the illness itself. When they cease he
is astonished to find himself less far from being cured than he had
thought. Such was the suffering caused – the ‘complication’ induced – by
Aimé’s letters about the bath-house girl and the laundry-maid. But if a
spiritual doctor could have visited me, he would have found that in
other respects my sorrow itself was on the mend. No doubt, as I was a
man, one of those amphibious creatures plunged simultaneously in the
past and in present reality, there was still a contradiction inside me
between the living memory of Albertine and my knowledge of her death.
But this contradiction was in a way the reverse of what it had been
before. The thought that Albertine was dead – which at first struggled
so furiously against the thought that she was still alive that I was
forced to run away from it as children do from an oncoming wave – had
finally, precisely because of these incessant assaults, won over the
place inside me still occupied until recently by the thought that she
was alive. Without my realizing it, it was now this thought of the death
of Albertine – and no longer the present memory of her life – that made
up the greater part of my unconscious day-dreams, so that if I suddenly
interrupted them to reflect on myself, what provoked my astonishment was
not, as it had been during the first few days, that the Albertine so
alive within me could no longer exist on this earth and could be dead,
but that the Albertine who no longer existed on earth, who was dead,
could have stayed so alive within me. The black tunnel shored up by my
series of interlocking memories, where my thoughts had been dreaming for
so long that they did not even notice it, was abruptly flooded by a
sunny spell, bathing it in the light of a distant, smiling blue universe
where Albertine was nothing more than a charming memory that left me
indifferent. Is that her, I wondered, is she the real one, or is it that
person who seemed during my long trek through darkness to be the only
reality? A sort of self-multiplication made the character that I had
been until so recently, and who lived for nothing but the permanent
expectation of the moment when Albertine would come to kiss him
good-night, appear to me now as only a small part of myself which I had
already almost shed, and I felt the youthful freshness of a bud starting
to open and burst through its leaves into flower. It is also possible
that these brief flashes of illumination made me become more aware of my
love for Albertine, as happens with all ideas which are too fixed and
which need to feel resistance in order to affirm themselves. Those who
lived through the 1870 war,²⁵ for instance, say that the idea of the war
had gradually come to seem natural to them, not because they did not
think enough about the war, but because they thought about it all the
time. And to understand what a strange and momentous event a war is,
something different was needed to shake them out of their constant
obsession, to forget for a moment that war ruled their lives, and to
find themselves as they had been when they had been at peace, until
suddenly on to this temporarily blank screen the monstrous reality that
they had so long ceased to see, since they saw nothing else, would at
last be distinctly projected.

If for the time being this retreat within me of different memories of
Albertine had at least been executed not in staggered ranks but in this
instantaneous rout, along the whole front line of my memory, with the
memories of her betrayals moving away at the same time as those of her
favours, forgetting would have brought me peace. It was not to be. As on
a beach where the tide runs out unevenly, I was already gnawed by the
pangs of one or other of my suspicions when the image of her sweet
presence had already receded too far away from me to be able to act as a
remedy. As for the acts of betrayal, they made me suffer because,
however many years previously they had been committed, they were new for
me; but I suffered less as they grew old, that is, as I imagined them
less vividly, for the remoteness of an object is proportionate rather to
the visual power of the memory observing it than to the real distance of
the number of days which have passed, as the memory of a dream from the
night before may appear to us so faded and imprecise that it seems more
remote than an event dating from several years earlier. But although the
thought of the death of Albertine was making progress inside me, the ebb
tide of the feeling that she was alive, even if it did not arrest that
progress, did none the less oppose it and hinder its regular advance.
And now I realize that during this period (no doubt because I had
forgotten the hours that she had been sequestered by me, which, since
they dispelled within me the suffering caused by her misdeeds and left
me almost indifferent because I knew that she was no longer committing
them, had become so much evidence of her innocence), I suffered the
martyrdom of living habitually with an idea just as new as the one that
Albertine was dead (until then I had always started out from the idea
that she was alive), an idea that I would have thought just as
impossible to bear and which, without my realizing it, was gradually
forming the basis of my conscious mind and substituting itself for the
idea that Albertine was innocent: it was the idea that she was guilty.
At times when I thought I doubted her, I did in fact on the contrary
believe in her: likewise I took as the starting-point for my other ideas
the certainty – often contradicted, as had been the opposite idea – of
her guilt, while still imagining that I was still in doubt. I must have
suffered greatly during that period, but I realize now that it had to be
thus. We may be cured of suffering only on condition that we experience
that suffering to the full. By protecting Albertine from all contact, by
forging the illusion that she was innocent, just as when later I took as
the basis of my reasoning the thought that she was alive, all I was
doing was postponing the moment of my cure, because I was postponing the
long hours of preparation and the inevitable suffering that it would
take. But when habit got to work on this idea of the guilt of Albertine,
it would do so according to the same laws as those I had already
experienced during the course of my life. Just as the name of Guermantes
had lost the charm and significance of a road bordered with water lilies
and of Gilbert le Mauvais’s stained-glass window, so Albertine’s
presence had lost those of the blue valleys of the sea, the names of
Swann, the liftboy, the Princesse de Guermantes and so many others, a
charm and a significance each entrusted to a single word which they
judged mature enough to live on its own, as someone who wants to train a
servant will show him the ropes for a couple of weeks and then withdraw,
so the painful power of Albertine’s guilt would be expelled outside me
by habit. Besides, by that time, as when an army attacks simultaneously
on two flanks, in this action mounted by habit, two allies would take up
arms on each other’s behalf. It is because my idea of Albertine’s guilt
would become a more plausible and familiar idea for me as it would
become less painful. But at the same time, as it became less painful,
the objections raised to the certainty of this guilt and which were
suggested to my intellect only by my desire not to suffer too much,
would fall away one by one; and each process would facilitate the other,
I would move fairly swiftly from the certainty that Albertine was
innocent to the certainty that she was guilty. I needed to live with the
idea of the death of Albertine, with the idea of her misdeeds, for these
ideas to become habitual, that is for me to be able to forget these
ideas and finally forget Albertine herself.

I had not yet reached this stage. Sometimes it was my memory, sharpened
for instance by the intellectual excitement of reading, which renewed my
sorrow; at other times it was, on the contrary, my sorrow, brought on
for instance by the anguish induced by stormy weather, which dredged up
some memory of our love and raised it nearer to the light. Moreover
these revivals of my love for Albertine once she was dead might occur
after an interval of indifference interspersed with other attractions,
as when, after the long interval which had started with the kiss which
had been denied me in Balbec, during which time I had been much more
concerned with Mme de Guermantes, Andrée and Mlle de Stermaria, my love
had revived once more when I had begun to see her frequently again. Yet
even now different preoccupations could lead to a separation – from a
dead woman this time – where I would become more indifferent to her. And
all for the same reason, that she was still alive for me. And even
later, when I loved her less, it nevertheless remained for me one of
those desires which rapidly pall, but which rekindle when they have been
left to rest for a while. I pursued one live woman, then another, then I
returned to my dead one. Often it was in the darkest corners of my self,
when I could no longer form a clear idea of Albertine, that a name would
come by chance to excite painful reactions that I no longer believed
possible, as in certain dying people whose brains have ceased to think
but whose limbs may be made to contract when pierced by a needle. And
for long periods, these stimuli were activated so rarely that I was led
to seek out for myself a moment of sorrow or a fit of jealousy, to try
to reconnect with the past and remember her better. For since missing a
woman is no more than reviving a love that remains subject to the same
laws as all love, the force of my regret was increased by the same
causes which, while Albertine was alive, would have augmented my love
for her and which had always given pride of place to jealousy and pain.
But these occasions – for an illness, or a war, can last far longer than
the most careful calculations had predicted – arose most often without
my knowledge and caused me such violent shocks that I was much more
concerned to protect myself from the suffering which they had caused
than to appeal to them to yield me a memory.

Moreover it did not always even need a word like Chaumont²⁶ (even a
syllable common to two different names could enable my memory – as an
electrician can use the slightest conducting substance – to re-establish
contact between Albertine and my heart) to refer directly to one of my
suspicions in order to arouse it and to work as the password, the magic
‘open sesame’ creating access to a past which we had ceased to notice
because, in having tired of looking at it, we literally no longer
possessed it; we had been diminished by its loss, thinking that through
this subtraction our own personality had changed shape, like a
geometrical figure which loses a side if it loses an angle; just as
certain phrases, for instance, which included the name of a street or a
road where Albertine might have walked, were sufficient to incarnate a
non-existent but virtual jealousy in search of a body, a dwelling, any
material anchorage or specific concrete form. Often it was quite simply
during my sleep that these reprises, these da capos of a dream turning
several pages of my memory and of the calendar, returned me, or rather
made me regress to, a painful but distant impression, which had long ago
given way to others, but which now became present again. Usually it
arrived accompanied by a whole theatrical staging, clumsy but striking,
which created the illusion of a visible and an audible reality, which I
thereafter dated back to that night. Moreover in the story of a love and
its struggles against the process of forgetting, does not dreaming hold
an even greater place than waking, since dreams take no notice of
infinitesimal divisions of time, suppress transitions, reject blatant
contradictions, undo in an instant the web of consolation so slowly
woven during the day and during the night arrange for us to meet the
woman whom we would ultimately have forgotten as long as we never saw
her again? For, whatever people may say, it is perfectly possible during
a dream to have the impression that what is happening is real. And this
could be judged impossible only by using arguments drawn from our waking
experience, but these are hidden from us at the time. As a result, this
implausible life seems true to us. Sometimes through a flaw in the
internal lighting which treacherously made the room disappear, as my
carefully staged memories gave me the illusion of real life, I thought
that I had really arranged to meet Albertine and had really met her; but
then I found myself unable to walk towards her, to utter the words which
I wanted to speak, to relight my extinguished lamp in order to see her:
impossibilities in my dream which were simply the immobility, the
speechlessness and the blindness of the sleeper, just as we may suddenly
see in a magic-lantern show a great shadow, which is that of the lantern
itself, or its operator, which were meant to be hidden, blotting out the
images of the characters which were meant to be projected. On other
occasions Albertine was in my dream and wanted to leave me again,
without her decision managing to move me. It was because a warning ray
of light from my memory had managed to infiltrate the darkness of my
sleep; and what lay hidden within Albertine, and what removed all import
from her future actions and her intended departure, was the notion that
she was dead. I chatted with her and, while I was talking, my
grandmother was walking about at the other end of the room. Part of her
chin had crumbled to pieces like fractured marble, but I found nothing
extraordinary in that. I told Albertine that I would have questions to
put to her concerning the bath-house at Balbec and a certain
laundry-maid from Touraine, but that I was leaving it until later
because we had plenty of time and there was no longer any hurry. She
promised me that she had been doing nothing wrong and that all she had
done was kiss Mlle Vinteuil on the lips the day before. ‘What? Is she
here? – Yes, and what is more, it is time for me to leave, for I have to
see her in a moment.’ And because since her death I no longer held her
prisoner at home as I had during the last phases of her life, her visit
to Mlle Vinteuil perturbed me. But I did not want it to show. Albertine
told me that she had done no more than kiss her, but she must be
starting to lie again as in the days when she used to deny everything.
In a moment she would probably no longer be content merely to kiss Mlle
Vinteuil. Obviously from one point of view I was wrong to feel so
worried, since, so we are led to believe, the dead can neither act nor
feel. This is what people say, but it did not prevent my grandmother,
who was dead, from living on for quite a few years and from walking
around my room at that very moment. And doubtless, once I was awake,
this notion of a dead woman living on would have become as impossible
for me to comprehend as I find it to explain. But I had formulated it so
many times, during these periods of temporary madness that we call
dreams, that I had finally become used to it; our memories of dreams can
become permanent if they are repeated often enough. And I imagine that
even when cured and having recovered his reason, the man who must
understand rather better than others what he wanted to say during an
earlier period of his mental life, would be the man who had undertaken
to explain to visitors to a mental hospital that he was not himself
insane despite the doctor’s claims, lucidly analysing the monstrous
imaginings of each of the patients and concluding, ‘Take that man who
looks quite normal, you wouldn’t think he was mad, and yet he thinks he
is Jesus Christ, and that is impossible, because it is I who am Jesus
Christ!’ And a long time after the end of my dream, I remained tormented
by the kiss which Albertine told me she had given, in words which I
thought I could still hear. And they must in fact have passed very close
to my ears since it was I myself who had uttered them. All day long I
continued to converse with Albertine, I asked her questions, I forgave
her, I made up for the things that I had always wanted to tell her but
had forgotten to do during her lifetime. And suddenly I took fright as I
realized that this person evoked by my memory, the person to whom all
these remarks were addressed, no longer corresponded to anything in the
real world, that her various facial features, given the unity of a
person driven only by the continuous will to live, which was now
annihilated, were destroyed. On other occasions, without having dreamed,
I felt as soon as I awoke that my inner climate had changed, a cold wind
was blowing relentlessly from another direction, from the depths of my
past, bringing with it the chiming of far-off hours and the whistles of
departures which I usually failed to hear. I tried to pick up a book. I
opened a novel by Bergotte which I had particularly liked. I was very
fond of its charming characters, and as I soon fell under the spell of
the book once more, I started to take a personal interest in wanting to
have the wicked woman punished; my eyes brimmed with tears when the
happiness of the betrothed couple was safe at last. ‘But then,’ I cried
in despair, ‘I cannot conclude from the fact that I attach so much
importance to what Albertine might have done, that her personality is
something real which cannot be abolished, that I shall find her one day
unchanged in heaven, if I desire so fervently, await so impatiently and
welcome so tearfully the success of someone who has only ever existed in
Bergotte’s imagination, someone whom I have never seen, whose face I am
free to imagine however I wish!’ There were moreover in this book
attractive girls, amorous correspondence and deserted paths on which to
meet, which reminded me that clandestine love affairs could exist, which
reawakened my jealousy, as if Albertine had still been capable of going
for a walk along a deserted path. It also included the story of a man
who meets a woman whom he had loved in her youth, fifty years earlier,
but fails to recognize her and is bored by her company. And this
reminded me that love does not last for ever, and I felt overwhelmed, as
if I were destined to be separated from Albertine and meet her with
indifference in my old age. And if I came across a map of France my
fearful eyes conspired to avoid encountering Touraine, to save me from
being jealous, and, to save me from being unhappy, Normandy, where at
least Balbec and Doncières would be marked, between which I could trace
all the routes which we had so often travelled together. Amid other
names of French towns or villages, even if only read or heard, the name
of Tours, for instance, seemed differently composed, not now of
immaterial images but of toxic substances which acted instantaneously on
my heart, making it beat more rapidly and painfully. And if this power
extended to certain names, which she had rendered so different from
others, then why, if I moved closer to home and concentrated only on
Albertine herself, should I be surprised to find that this irresistible
force, which might well have been exerted on me by any other woman,
should be the outcome of a tangled confrontation and interplay of
dreams, desires, habits and affections, duly disturbed by the intrusion
of alternating pains and pleasures? And this process continued after her
death, since memory suffices to sustain real life, which is mental. I
recalled Albertine alighting from the railway carriage, telling me that
she would like to go to Saint-Martin-le-Vêtu, and I also saw her before,
with her polo cap pulled down over her cheeks; I discovered fresh
possibilities of happiness and reached out for them, thinking, ‘We could
have gone to Infreville, or even Doncières.’ There was not one resort
near Balbec where I did not recognize her, so that this region, like
some still-preserved mythological land, rendered the most ancient and
charming legends of my love, however buried beneath later experience,
alive and hurtful. Oh, how I would suffer if ever I had to sleep again
in Balbec in that bed, around whose copper frame, as around a motionless
pivot or fixed bars, my life had moved and evolved, winding around it in
succession my cheerful conversations with my grandmother, the shock of
her death, Albertine’s sweet caresses, the discovery of her vice and now
a new life where I knew, as I glimpsed the glass-fronted book-cases
which reflected the sea, that Albertine would never again appear! Did
not this Balbec hotel resemble the unchanging domestic interior on the
stage of some provincial theatre, where year after year the most diverse
plays are set, now for a comedy, now for one tragedy and then for a
different one, and then again for a purely poetical drama, this hotel
which already belonged to quite a remote period of my life? The fact
that this single element, with its four walls, its book-case and its
mirror, always remained the same during each new period of my life made
me feel even more certain that overall it was everything else, that is,
I myself, which had changed, thus giving me the impression that the
mysteries of life, love and death (from which children optimistically
believe themselves excluded) are not privileges reserved for others,
but, as we realize later, proudly but painfully, have been part and
parcel of our own lives and bodies throughout the passing years.

I tried from time to time to look at the newspapers, but I found reading
them not only unpleasant but far from innocuous. In fact so many paths
branch out from each idea within us, as from a crossing in a forest,
that at the moment when I least expected it I found myself faced with a
fresh memory. The title of Fauré’s song, ‘Le Secret’,²⁷ had led me to
_Le Secret du roi_ by the Duc de Broglie,²⁸ the name of de Broglie to
that of Chaumont. Or again, the words Good Friday had made me think of
Golgotha, and Golgotha of the etymology of the word, which, apparently,
is equivalent to _Calvus mons_, Chaumont. But no matter which path I had
climbed on my way to Chaumont, when it emerged I was struck with a shock
so cruel that from that moment on I thought far more of preventing it
from hurting me than searching it for memories. A few moments after the
shock, my intellect, lagging behind like thunder after lightning,
brought me the explanation. Chaumont had made me think of the
Buttes-Chaumont where Mme Bontemps had told me that Andrée often used to
go with Albertine, while Albertine had told me that she had never seen
the Buttes-Chaumont. After a certain age our memories are so interwoven
with each other that the object of our thoughts or the book which we are
reading has practically no importance. We have left traces of ourselves
everywhere, everything is fertile, everything is dangerous, and we can
make discoveries every bit as precious in an advertisement for soap as
in Pascal’s _Pensées_.

No doubt an incident like that of the Buttes-Chaumont, which had seemed
trivial to me at the time, was in itself a much less serious and
decisive charge against Albertine than the affair of the bath-house girl
or the laundry-maid. But in the first place a memory which we experience
fortuitously finds us with our powers of imagination, that is, in this
case, with our powers of suffering intact, whereas on the other hand we
have already partly blunted these when we have deliberately applied our
minds to recreating a memory. And then, I had become accustomed to these
memories (of the bath-house girl or the laundry-maid), always present in
my memory, however dimly, like furniture placed in a dark corridor,
which we somehow avoid bumping into without distinguishing them clearly.
But, on the other hand, I had not thought of the Buttes-Chaumont for
ages, nor for instance of Albertine looking into the mirror at the
casino at Balbec, nor her unexplained expression the evening when I had
waited so long for her after the reception at the Guermantes, all those
parts of her life which remained outside my heart and which I would have
liked to know in order to assimilate them and annex them to it, to add
them to gentler memories formed in my heart by an inner Albertine that I
really possessed. Raising a corner of the heavy veil of habit (habit
which stultifies us and which during the whole course of our existence
hides more or less the whole universe from us, and under cover of utter
darkness, without changing their labels, substitutes for the most
dangerous or intoxicating poisons of life something anodyne which
procures no delight), these memories returned to me as on their first
appearance, with the same sharp, fresh novelty that each new season
brings as it returns, changing our routine time-table and providing us,
even in the realm of our pleasures – if we climb into a carriage on the
first fine day of spring or leave the house at sunrise – with an
exultant awareness of our most insignificant actions, which invests this
one intense moment with more value than the totality of the days
preceding it. As they recede, passing days gradually cover over those
which went before and are themselves buried by those that come after.
But each past day remains deposited within us as in some vast library
where there are copies even of the oldest books, which probably no one
will ever ask to consult. And yet if this past day should pass through
the translucent layers of the following eras, rise to the surface and
spread out from within us until it covers our whole surface, then for a
moment names will resume their former meanings, people their former
faces and we our former souls, and we shall feel with a diffuse but
newly tolerable and transient sense of suffering, the problems which
remained intractable for so long and which caused us so much anguish at
the time. Our selves are composed of our successive states,
superimposed. But this superimposition is not immutable like the
stratification of a mountain. A tremor is liable at any moment to throw
older layers back up to the surface. I found myself back at the moment
when I left the reception at the Princesse de Guermantes, waiting for
Albertine to arrive. What had she been doing that night? Deceiving me?
With whom? Aimé’s revelations, even if I accepted them, did not in any
way diminish my anxious and desperate interest in this unexpected
question, as though each different Albertine, each new memory, asked a
specific question of jealousy, which the answers to the others could not
resolve.

But I would have liked to know not only with which woman she had spent
the night, but what particular pleasure it had brought her, what was
happenng inside her at that moment. Sometimes at Balbec Françoise had
gone to fetch her and had told me that she had found her leaning out of
the window, looking anxious and expectant as though she were waiting for
someone. Now let us suppose that I learned that the girl she was waiting
for was Andrée, what was Albertine’s state of mind while she was waiting
for her, what state of mind lay hidden behind her anxious, expectant
expression? How important for Albertine were these inclinations, how
large a place did they hold in her concerns? Alas, remembering my own
agitation every time that I came across a girl who attracted me, and
sometimes when I had only heard her mentioned and had not even seen her,
my breaking into a cold sweat in my concern to appear handsome and
interesting, I needed only to imagine the same voluptuous excitement in
Albertine in order to torment myself, as if I had discovered the device
which my aunt Léonie, after the visit of a certain physician who had
seemed unconvinced by the reality of her malady, had hoped someone might
invent in order to enable the doctor to feel all the sufferings of his
patient, so that he would better understand them. And this was already
enough to torment me, to tell me that compared to this she must have
found our discussions of Stendhal and Victor Hugo truly insignificant,
for her heart to be drawn to others, to fly away from mine and take root
elsewhere. But even the importance that she attached to this desire and
the reticence with which she protected it could not inform me of its
qualities, let alone how she experienced those qualities when she talked
to herself about it. When our bodies suffer, at least we cannot choose
our pain. Our illness determines and imposes it. But with jealousy we
are forced as it were to try out all types and scales of suffering
before we settle for the one that seems to suit us. And what greater
problem could we face than one which concerns the kind of suffering
where our beloved takes her pleasure with people other than ourselves,
who give her sensations that we are unable to give her, or at least with
people who through their characteristics, their behaviour and the image
they project, create an impression on her totally different from ours!
Oh! If only Albertine had been in love with Saint-Loup! How much less I
would have suffered, or so it seemed to me!

There is no doubt that we are unaware of the nature of each individual’s
personal sensibility, but generally we do not even know that we are
unaware of it, for we are indifferent to other people’s sensibilities.
As far as Albertine was concerned, my happiness or unhappiness might
have hung on what kind of sensibility she had; I was well aware that it
was a mystery to me, and the fact that it was a mystery was already a
source of pain. I did once have the illusion of seeing, and on another
occasion of hearing, the unknown desires and pleasures felt by
Albertine. Of seeing them, when Andrée came to see me, some time after
Albertine’s death. For the first time she seemed beautiful to me, I
found that her curly, almost frizzy hair, and her moody eyes with their
dark rings, must have been what Albertine had fallen in love with, and I
saw materialize before my eyes what had nourished her amorous fantasies,
what had fired her eyes with anticipated desire the day when she wanted
to return from Balbec so precipitously. As if a dark, unknown flower
belonging to someone beyond the grave from whom I had been unable to
gather it were now recovered and presented to me, this miraculously
exhumed and priceless relic seemed to present me with Albertine’s desire
incarnate in the form of Andrée as she appeared to me, just as Venus
figured Jupiter’s desire. Andrée mourned for Albertine, but I felt
straight away that she did not really miss her friend. Forcibly deprived
of her friend by death, Andrée seemed to have come to terms very easily
with a final separation that I would not have dared request while
Albertine was alive, for fear that Andrée would withhold her consent. On
the contrary she seemed to accept this renunciation with no difficulty,
albeit only at the very moment when this was of no further use to me;
Andrée handed me Albertine, but only now that she was dead and had lost
for me not only her life but, in retrospect, something of her reality,
as I saw that she was not unique and indispensable for Andrée, who had
been able to replace her with other friends.

While Albertine was alive, I would never have dared ask Andrée to
confide in me the nature of the friendship between themselves and with
Mlle Vinteuil’s girl-friend, not being at all sure in latter days that
Andrée would not tell Albertine everything that I had told her. Now this
investigation, even if it delivered no results, would at least hold no
danger. I spoke to Andrée, not as if I were questioning her but as if I
had always been kept informed, perhaps by Albertine, of Andrée’s own
inclinations for women and her own relationship with Mlle Vinteuil. She
admitted everything with no inhibition, and with a smile. From this
admission I could draw the most hurtful conclusions; first and foremost,
since Andrée, who had behaved so affectionately and seductively towards
so many young men at Balbec, would never have given anyone to suppose
that she indulged in those practices which she now made no attempt to
deny, so that by analogy, on discovering this new Andrée, I was led to
think that Albertine might just as easily have made a similar confession
to anyone other than me, whom she guessed to be jealous. But
furthermore, now that Andrée, who had been Albertine’s best friend and
the one for whom she had probably returned to Balbec on purpose, had
admitted her inclinations, the conclusion which I was bound to draw was
that Albertine and Andrée had always had a relationship together. Of
course, just as we do not always dare take a look at gifts offered by
strangers in their presence, preferring to wait until the donor has left
before we undo the wrapping, so, as long as Andrée was there, I could
not withdraw within myself to examine the pain that she caused, which I
already felt greatly upsetting my bodily dependants, my nerves and my
heart, although from politeness I pretended not to notice; on the
contrary, I deployed all my reserves of charm in conversing with my
young guest, without diverting my gaze towards these inner events. I
found it particularly painful to hear Andrée say of Albertine, ‘Ah, yes,
she did like driving out with me in the Chevreuse valley.’ The vague,
non-existent universe where Albertine and Andrée drove out together
seemed to be joined retrospectively by this new and satanic creation,
adding to the work of God a valley of the damned. I sensed that Andrée
was going to tell me everything that she used to do with Albertine, and,
although I did everything I could, from politeness, cunning, self-esteem
and perhaps even from gratitude, to appear more and more affectionate,
while the space that I was still able to concede to Albertine’s
innocence shrank smaller and smaller, I had the impression that despite
my efforts I appeared frozen, like an animal trapped but transfixed by
the progressively narrowing circles described by a bird of prey taking
its own sweet time, knowing that it can choose the moment to strike,
since its prey can no longer escape. I looked at her however and
summoning the last reserves of good humour, naturalness and
self-confidence that remain in a person not wishing to seem to fear
being hypnotized by someone’s gaze, I dropped the following casual
remark: ‘I had never spoken to you about it before for fear of upsetting
you, but now that it is a comfort to speak of her, I can tell you that
for some time I had been aware of the kind of relationship that you
enjoyed with Albertine; besides, you will be pleased to know, although
you knew it already, that Albertine adored you.’ I told Andrée that I
would very much like her to let me watch her indulge in this kind of
practice (even if she restricted her caresses to those which she would
not be too embarrassed to perform in my presence) with those of
Albertine’s girl-friends who shared the same tastes, and I mentioned
Rosemonde, Berthe and all of Albertine’s friends, to see her reaction.
‘Apart from the fact that in your presence I would not do what you
mention for anything in the world,’ replied Andrée, ‘I do not believe
that any of the girls you mention were that way inclined.’ Moving
closer, despite myself, to the monster that fascinated me, I replied,
‘Come, now, you cannot expect me to believe that Albertine was the only
person in your group that you did these things with! – But I never did
do things like that with Albertine. – Listen, my dear Andrée, why deny
something that I’ve known about for at least three years? I see nothing
wrong in it, quite the opposite. I was just thinking of the evening when
she was so keen to go with you to Mme Verdurin’s the next day, perhaps
you remember …’ Before I had come to the end of my sentence, I saw an
anxious look, like the face of someone allowed backstage before a play
commences who peeps through the curtain then withdraws immediately to
avoid being noticed, flash across Andrée’s eyes, making them as narrow
and piercing as certain gemstones which are so sharp that jewellers find
them almost impossible to use. The anxious look disappeared, everything
returned to normal, but I sensed that everything I saw from then on
would be artificially arranged for my benefit. At that moment I caught
sight of myself in the mirror; I was struck by a certain resemblance
between myself and Andrée. If I had not long ceased to shave my upper
lip, and if I had still had only the faintest shadow of a moustache, the
resemblance would have been complete. Perhaps it was at Balbec, when she
had observed my moustache as it was just starting to grow again, that
Albertine had suddenly had that impatient, furious urge to return to
Paris. ‘But I can’t tell you something that is not true just because you
don’t disapprove of it. I swear that I never did anything with Albertine
and I am convinced that she detested that sort of thing. The people who
told you that were lying, perhaps from self-interest,’ she said, with a
suspicious, questioning air. ‘Well, so be it, since you don’t want to
tell me,’ I replied, preferring to seem as if I did not want to reveal
my evidence, rather than failing to have any. Yet I did refer in an
offhand manner to the Buttes-Chaumont, just in case. ‘I might have gone
to the Buttes-Chaumont with Albertine, but is there anything
particularly wrong with the place?’ I asked her if she might not ask
Gisèle about it, since she had at one time been very close to Albertine.
But Andrée declared that Gisèle had recently stabbed her in the back,
and asking her a favour was the one and only thing that she could never
agree to do for me. ‘If you see her,’ she added, ‘don’t tell her what
I’ve told you about her, there’s no need to make an enemy of her. She
knows what I think of her, but I have always preferred to avoid getting
involved in violent rows with her and then having to patch things up.
And then again, she is dangerous, but anyone who had read the letter she
sent me last week, where she told such treacherous lies, would
understand that nothing, not even the noblest actions in the world,
could efface its memory.’ In short, if, despite the fact that Andrée
followed her inclinations to the point of not trying to hide them and
despite the great affection which Albertine had certainly felt for her,
Andrée had never had carnal relations with Albertine and had always been
ignorant of the fact that Albertine shared her inclinations, then surely
it must be because Albertine had not had such inclinations and had never
had such relationships, which she would have sought to enjoy with Andrée
in preference to anyone else. Thus as soon as Andrée had left, I
realized that her trenchant affirmation had calmed me down. But perhaps
Andrée had felt obliged by the sense of duty that she felt towards her
dead friend, whose memory still lived on within her, not to let anyone
believe what Albertine had most likely asked her during her lifetime to
deny.

After that one moment when, looking at Andrée, I thought I caught a
glimpse of the pleasures in which I had so often tried to imagine
Albertine indulging, there was another occasion when I thought that I
surprised their presence, but this time through my ears, not my eyes. I
had asked for two laundry-maids from a neighbourhood which Albertine
often used to frequent to be invited to a house of ill-fame. As one
caressed the other, her partner started suddenly to make a noise which
at first I was unable to interpret, for we never perfectly understand
the significance of a strange sound which expresses a sensation that we
do not ourselves feel. If we are listening in an adjoining room, without
being able to see, we may take for a fit of giggles the screams of a
patient operated on without anaesthetic; and as for the sounds made by a
mother who has just learned of the death of her child, it could seem to
us, if we did not know the cause, as difficult to ascribe to the human
tongue as the sounds emitted by an animal or a harp. It takes us a while
to understand that both kinds of sound express by analogy something we
call suffering, however different from our own experience, and similarly
it took me a while to understand that this particular sound expressed by
analogy something, however different, which I had experienced, what I
called pleasure; and this pleasure must have been very powerful to shake
the person who felt it to such an extent that it drew from her this
unknown language, which seemed to designate and comment on all the
stages of dramatic delight experienced by the young woman hidden from my
eyes by the curtain permanently drawn against anyone but themselves over
what happens in the mysterious private depths of every human creature.
At all events these two young things were unable to tell me anything,
they had never even heard of Albertine.

Novelists often claim in their introductions that somewhere on their
travels abroad they have met someone who has told them of another
person’s life. They then let this travelling companion tell the tale,
and their novel is precisely the story they hear. Thus Stendhal heard
about Fabrice del Dongo’s life²⁹ from a canon in Padua. When we are in
love, that is, when some other person’s life seems to be a great mystery
to us, how we would like to come across such a well-informed narrator!
For he surely exists. Do we ourselves not quite dispassionately tell the
life story of some woman or other to one of our friends or to a stranger
who knew nothing of her love affairs but who listens to us out of sheer
curiosity? The man I was at the time when I told Bloch about the
Princesse de Guermantes or Mme Swann, the man who could have spoken to
me of Albertine, there always is such a person … but we will never meet
him. It seemed to me that if I could have met women who had known her, I
would have found out everything that I needed to know. And yet to a
stranger it must have seemed as if nobody could know her life better
than me. Did I not even know her best friend, Andrée? Thus it is that we
believe that a minister’s friend must know the truth about certain
affairs or he would not be caught up in his trial. But the friend knows
from personal experience that each time he has discussed politics with
the minister, the latter spoke in general terms and told him no more
than he might read in the newspapers, or if he had a request, his
repeated appeals for the minister’s help were met each time by the
phrase ‘I can do nothing about it’, which the friend himself can do
nothing about. I thought ‘If only I had been able to meet such and such
a witness!’ from whom, if I had met them, I would have been able to
obtain no more than I had from Andrée, who was herself the guardian of a
secret which she refused to deliver. I was different again in this from
Swann, who, when he was no longer jealous, ceased to be curious about
what Odette might have done with Forcheville; even when my jealousy had
subsided, the only thing that held any charm for me was to get to know
Albertine’s laundry-maid and other girls from her neighbourhood, in
order to reconstruct her life and relationships there. And since desire
always arises from something we have already found impressive, as I had
found happened with Gilberte, or with the Duchesse de Guermantes, it was
in the neighbourhoods where Albertine had formerly lived that I sought
out women of her milieu, who were the only women whose presence I
desired. Even if they could tell me nothing, the only women to whom I
felt attracted were those that Albertine had known or whom she might
have known, women of her milieu or of the circles which she frequented,
in short women who for me possessed the attraction of resembling her or
of being those who would have attracted her. Recalling in this way
either Albertine herself or the kind of woman that appealed to her,
these women awakened in me painful feelings, whether of jealousy or
regret, which later, as my grief subsided, changed into a curiosity
which was not without charm. And these women were mostly working-class
girls, since their lives were so different from my experience. Of
course, it is only in our minds that we ever possess anything, and we do
not possess a painting because we have it in our dining-room, if we do
not understand it, nor a country because we merely reside in it without
ever looking at it. But I have to say that in former times I did have
the illusion that I possessed Balbec once more, when Albertine came to
see me in Paris and I held her in my arms; just as I made a rather
glancing not to say furtive contact with Albertine’s life when I tasted
the atmosphere of a workshop, shop-counter gossip, or life in the slums,
in the arms of a working-girl. Always related to Albertine – as
Albertine herself had been related to Balbec – Andrée and these other
women were those kinds of substitutes for pleasure which replace each
other in diminishing order and allow us to relinquish the pleasures that
we are unable to attain, like staying in Balbec or loving Albertine,
those kinds of pleasure which (just as going to the Louvre to see a
Titian that used to be in Venice consoles us for being unable to go to
Venice), as they fan out into a series of infinite nuances, arrange our
lives into a set of concentric, continuous, harmonious but gradually
fading circles, around an initial desire that has set the tone,
eliminated everything that does not blend with it and has imposed its
dominant tone (as happened to me for instance with the Duchesse de
Guermantes and with Gilberte). Andrée and these other women acted the
same part in my desire to have Albertine close at hand, which I knew I
could no longer gratify, as had one evening, in the days when I knew
Albertine only by sight, the fresh, sinuous, sunlit form of a bunch of
grapes.

Now that they were associated with the memory of my love, the physical
and social attributes of Albertine, whom I had loved in spite of them,
had the opposite effect, that of orientating my desire towards what
previously it would have least naturally chosen, dark-haired girls from
the lower-middle classes. Of course what was starting partially to
revive within me was the immense desire that my love for Albertine had
been unable to assuage, that immense desire to know life which I used to
feel on the roads near Balbec or the streets of Paris, the desire which
had so made me suffer when, supposing that it also existed in
Albertine’s heart, I had attempted to deprive her of the means of
satisfying that desire with anyone other than myself. Now that I was
able to bear the thought of her desires, and since this thought was
immediately aroused by the upsurge of my own desires, bringing our two
boundless appetites into union, I would have liked us to have been able
to indulge them together, and I thought, ‘She would have liked that
girl,’ but as this oblique reference suddenly made me think of her and
her death, I felt too sad to follow my desires any further. Just as in
former times the Méséglise and the Guermantes ways had established the
foundations of my taste for the countryside and would have prevented me
from finding deep charm in a neighbourhood with no old church or
cornflowers or buttercups, so in the same way it was by linking them
within me to the charms of the past that my love for Albertine made me
seek certain types of women to the exclusion of others; as in the days
before I had fallen in love, I started to feel the need for harmonics
emanating from her which could become interchangeable with my memory as
it became gradually less exclusive. I could not now have found pleasure
in the company of a proud, blonde duchess, because she would not have
evoked in me any of the emotions which derived from Albertine, from my
desire for her, from the jealousy I had felt for her loves, or from my
suffering over her death. For in order to gain strength, our sensations
need to trigger within us something other than themselves, a sentiment
which cannot find its satisfaction in pleasure but which becomes added
to desire, swells it and makes it cling desperately to pleasure. The
more the love that Albertine might have felt for certain women gradually
ceased to make me suffer, the more it attached these women to my past,
making them into something real; just as the memory of Combray gave
greater reality to its old buttercups and hawthorn than to the new
flowers of spring. Even when I thought of Andrée, I no longer said
furiously, ‘Albertine loved her,’ but, on the contrary, in order to
explain my own desire to myself, I said tenderly, ‘Albertine was fond of
her.’ I now understood those widowers whom one believes to be consoled
and who prove on the contrary that they are inconsolable because they
have married again, this time with their wife’s sister.

Thus my dying love seemed to make new loves possible for me, and
Albertine, like those women long loved for their own sake who later,
feeling their lover’s ardour waning, preserve their power by settling
for the role of go-between, as La Pompadour did for Louis XV,³⁰ served
up a whole series of new young girls for me. Previously my time had been
divided into periods when I desired first one woman, then another. When
the violent pleasures offered by the one had been appeased, I fancied
the other, who offered an almost pure tenderness, until the need for
more artful caresses brought back the desire for the first. Now this
oscillation had come to an end, or rather, one of its phases had become
indefinitely protracted. What I would have preferred was that the new
arrival should come and live with me, and before leaving me in the
evening, give me a friendly, sisterly kiss. So that I might have come to
believe – had I not had the experience of the intolerable presence of
the other person – that I missed the kiss more than any particular lips,
the pleasure more than love, the habit more than the person. I would
have also liked the newcomer to play Vinteuil for me as Albertine had,
to discuss Elstir with me as she had. All of this was impossible. Their
love was not worthy of hers, I thought; whether because a love which
could include all those episodes, the visits to museums, the evenings at
concerts, the whole complicated life which generates correspondence,
conversation, the flirtation preceding the relationship itself and the
solemn friendship that follows, draws on deeper resources than love for
a woman who knows only how to yield, as an orchestra has more resources
than a piano; or whether because at a deeper level my need for the same
sort of affection that Albertine used to give me, the affection of a
reasonably well-educated girl who acted at the same time as a sister,
was only – like my need for girls from the same milieu as Albertine – a
revival of my memory of Albertine, of my memory of my love for her. And
once more I felt above all that memory is not creative, that it is
incapable of desiring anything different or even anything better than
what we have already possessed; and then that it is mental, so that
reality cannot provide it with the state to which it aspires; and
finally that the rebirth which it incarnates, since it emanates from a
dead person, is less the rebirth of the need for love, as it would have
us believe, than that of the need for the missing person. So that even
the resemblance to Albertine of the woman whom I had chosen, and the
resemblance of her affections, if I managed to obtain them, to those of
Albertine, only made me feel all the more the absence of what I had been
looking for without realizing it, of what was indispensable for the
rebirth of my love, that is Albertine herself, the period that we had
lived together, the past which I was seeking without realizing it. Of
course on sunny days Paris appeared to me endlessly blooming with young
girls whom I did not desire but who sprang from the dark roots of my
desire for Albertine and the unknown nights that she had spent far from
home. These were the sort of girl of whom when we first met, when she
was not wary of me, she had said, ‘What a ravishing little girl, look at
her lovely hair!’ All my former curiosity about her life when I knew her
only by sight, and on the other hand all my desires to live life to the
full, became fused in that one curious urge, to know the manner in which
Albertine felt pleasure, to see her with other women, perhaps because
thus, once they had left, I would remain alone with her, her last and
only master. And if I could have seen her hesitate as to whether it was
worth spending the evening with one girl or another, and noted her
satiety or perhaps her disappointment when the girl had gone, I could
have clarified and reduced to more sensible proportions the jealousy
inspired in me by Albertine, because in seeing how she experienced her
pleasures I would have taken the measure of them and discovered their
limits.

How much pleasure and sweetness had been lost to us both, I thought,
because of her fierce determination to deny her inclinations! And as I
once again tried to find what had been the reason for this obstinacy,
suddenly there came to me the memory of a remark that I had made one day
in Balbec when she had offered me a pencil. In reproaching her with not
letting me embrace her, I had told her that I found the thought of our
kissing as natural as I found the thought of a woman having relations
with another woman repellent. Alas, perhaps Albertine had remembered.

I took home with me the girls who should have appealed to me least. I
stroked their sleek, prim tresses, I admired their finely chiselled
little noses or their pale Spanish complexions. Of course even in former
times, even with women whom I happened to glimpse on the roads around
Balbec or on the streets of Paris, I had felt how singular was my desire
and how false it would be to try to assuage it with a different object.
But life, gradually revealing to me the permanence of our needs, had
taught me that if a person is unobtainable we have to settle for someone
else, and I felt that what I had asked of Albertine could have been
supplied by another, like Mlle de Stermaria. But it had been Albertine;
and between the satisfaction of my need for affection and the specific
features of her body the cross-stitch of memories had become so
intertwined that I could no longer tear my urge for affection away from
the body of Albertine, which had become embroidered into my memory. Only
she could bring me happiness. The idea of her uniqueness was no longer a
metaphysical _a priori_ deriving from Albertine’s individual qualities,
as formerly for various passing women, but an _a posteriori_ constituted
by my contingent but inseparably entangled memories. I could no longer
yearn for any affection without needing her and suffering from her
absence. In this way the very similarity of the woman I chose, and of
the affection I sought, to the happiness that I had known, only made me
all the more aware of everything they lacked in order to revive it. I
felt the same emptiness in them that I had felt in my room since
Albertine had left, the emptiness which I had hoped to fill by holding
these women in my arms. For they had never spoken to me of Vinteuil’s
music or Saint-Simon’s _Memoirs_,³¹ had never put on too much perfume
before coming to see me, never playfully brushed their eyelashes against
mine, the kind of things which take on importance because they seem to
allow us to cradle the sexual act itself within our dreams and create an
illusion of love, but in fact because they were part and parcel of my
memory of Albertine and because she was the person whom I was hoping to
find. The qualities that these women shared with Albertine made me feel
more keenly what they lacked, which was everything, but an everything
which could never exist again, since Albertine was dead. And thus my
love for Albertine, which had drawn me towards these women, made me feel
indifferent towards them, and my regret for Albertine and the
persistence of my jealousy, which had already outlasted my most
pessimistic forecasts, would doubtless not have changed very much if
their existence, isolated from the rest of my life, had been subject
only to the play of my memories, to the actions and reactions of a
psychology applicable to motionless states, and had not been sucked into
a vaster system where souls move through time as bodies through space.
As there is a spatial geometry, so there is a temporal psychology, where
the calculations of a two-dimensional psychology would no longer be
accurate because they would not account for Time and one of the forms
that it assumes, that is, forgetting; the process of forgetting, whose
force I was starting to feel and which is such a powerful tool of
adaptation to reality because it gradually destroys in us the remnants
of the past which constantly contradict it. And of course I might have
guessed much sooner that one day I would no longer love Albertine. When
I had understood the difference that there was between the importance of
her person and her actions for me as opposed to for others, implying
that my love was less a love for her than a love within me, I could have
drawn diverse conclusions from this subjective character of my love,
including the fact that, since it was a state of mind, it could clearly
survive longer than the person concerned, but also that having no real
link with this person, having no material support outside her, it must,
like all states of mind, even the most long-lasting, one day find itself
worn out and have to be ‘replaced’, and that on that day everything that
seemed to me to be so sweetly and indissolubly linked to Albertine would
no longer exist for me. The problem with people is that for us they are
no more than prints in our mental museum, which fade on exposure. And it
is precisely because of this that they form the basis of projects
illuminated by our thoughts, but thoughts tire and memories collapse:
the day would come when I would happily give Albertine’s room to the
first girl who wanted it, as I had given Albertine the agate marble or
other gifts of Gilberte’s.
CHAPTER 2

_Mademoiselle de Forcheville_

This is not to say that I did not still love Albertine, but it was
already not the same kind of love as I had felt in recent times; rather,
it was more like that love of former times when everything connected
with her, both places and people, inspired in me a curiosity containing
more charm than suffering. And in fact I now realized that before I
could forget her completely, and regain my initial indifference, I would
need, like some traveller returning down the same route to his point of
departure, to experience in reverse order all the emotions which I had
felt on the way out towards my great love. But these stages, these
moments of the past are not inert, they have retained the terrible force
and blissful ignorance of a hope which reached out then towards a time
that has now become the past, but which, in moments of hallucination, we
retrospectively take for the future. As I was reading one of Albertine’s
letters announcing her arrival for that very evening, I felt for a
second the joy of expectation. In these journeys which return along the
same track to a place where in reality we will never return, journeys
where we recognize the names and the features of all the stations we
stopped at on the outward journey, it sometimes happens that while we
have halted at one or other of these stations, we experience for a
moment the illusion that we have moved off, but in the direction of the
place we have just left, as we did on the way out. The illusion swiftly
dies, but for a second we felt ourselves driven forward once more: such
is the cruelty of memory.

And yet if, in order to regain the point of indifference from which we
started out, we cannot dispense with the need to cover in reverse order
the same stages that we had covered on our way to attaining love, the
itinerary or tracks which we follow are not necessarily the same
itinerary or tracks as the first time. They are equally indirect, since
forgetting proceeds no more regularly than love, but they do not
necessarily follow the same routes. And on my return journey, there
were, when I had nearly arrived, four stages which I particularly
remember, doubtless because I now saw in them things that had no part in
my love for Albertine, or at least which were connected with it only in
so far as everything which our souls contained before our great love
affair becomes associated with it, whether by nourishing it, by
resisting it, or by setting up contrasts and images for our intellect as
it analyses that love.

The first of these stages set in at the beginning of winter, one fine
All Saints’ Day when I had gone out. As I approached the Bois de
Boulogne, I recalled with sadness Albertine’s return, when she had come
to meet me at the Trocadéro, for it was the same day of the year, but
without Albertine. With sadness, yet not without pleasure, for the
repetition in the minor key, in a melancholy tone, of the same motif
that had punctuated my day the first time, and the very absence of
Françoise’s telephone call and of Albertine’s arrival, were not
something negative but, as my memories failed to materialize in reality,
their suppression gave the day a poignant note and made of it something
more beautiful than a single, uniform day, for what was lost, what had
been torn from it, remained imprinted there as if etched between the
lines. As I walked through the Bois I hummed phrases from Vinteuil’s
sonata. The thought that Albertine had played it for me so often no
longer hurt me too much, for nearly all my memories of her had entered
that second phase of their chemical reaction, where instead of
oppressing the heart with anxiety, they soothe it. From time to time, as
I reached the passages which she most frequently played and during which
she would tend to reminisce, or pass some familiar remark that I found
charming at the time, I thought, ‘Poor little girl,’ yet I thereby
infused the musical passage not with sadness but with more value, the
value of history and curiosity, just as Van Dyck’s portrait of Charles
I, already beautiful enough in its own right, gains even more in value
from the fact that it entered the national collections through Mme du
Barry’s desire to impress the king.¹ When the little phrase, before
entirely disappearing, disintegrates, and floats around for a moment as
it dissolves into its various elements, it was not, as it had been for
Swann, a messenger informing me of the disappearance of Albertine. The
little phrase did not awaken quite the same association of ideas in me
as it had in Swann. I had been particularly moved by the variations,
experiments, repetitions and ‘promise’ of the phrase, which played in
the sonata a role like that played in the course of my life by my love.
And now, as I came to realize how far, day by day, another element of my
love was drifting away, my jealousy or other aspects of my love
gradually returning in a vague memory as the piece quietly started, I
thought I saw my love dispersed or even dissolved in the little phrase.

As I followed the paths which ran through the shrubbery, veiled in a
hazy foliage which became flimsier every day, I felt the memory of a
drive beside Albertine in the car, when she was coming home with me and
I had felt my whole life wrapped up in hers, swim up again around me
amid the vague mist of darkening branches within which the setting sun
lit up irregular horizontal layers of golden foliage, as if they were
suspended in mid-air. Meanwhile I trembled at every moment, as does any
man whose obsession turns any woman standing at the corner of a path
into the possible likeness or identity of the woman he is thinking of.
‘It might be her!’ We look round, but the carriage moves on, and we do
not turn back. I was not content to contemplate this foliage merely with
the eyes of memory. It interested and moved me as do those purely
descriptive pages in whose midst an artist, in order to make them more
complete, introduces something fictional or a whole novel; and thus this
natural scene took on the only melancholy charm which could touch my
heart. The reason for this charm seemed to me to be the fact that I was
still just as much in love with Albertine, while the true reason was on
the contrary that inside me the work of forgetting was continuing to
evolve and that the memory of Albertine was becoming less painful, that
is, that it had changed; but however clearly we identify our own
impressions, as I then believed I saw clearly into my melancholia, we
are unable to plumb their deeper meaning: as with those attacks of
sickness that a doctor hears his patient describing, but which lead him
to detect a deeper cause, unknown to the patient, so our impressions and
ideas count only as symptoms. While my jealousy was held back by the
impressions of charm and sweet sadness that I felt, my senses were
reawakened. Once more, as when I had stopped seeing Gilberte, a love for
women surged up within me, freed of any exclusive association with a
particular woman once loved, and wafted like those essences liberated by
death and decay and which float suspended in the spring breeze, asking
only to be united with some new entity. Nowhere do flowers, even those
called ‘forget-me-nots’, bloom more readily than in a cemetery. I
watched the girls who so profusely decorated this fine new day, as I
would have in former times from Mme de Villeparisis’s carriage or a
carriage I had taken with Albertine on such a Sunday. As soon as I cast
my eyes on one or other of them, they were given their focus by the
curious, furtive, inviting looks, reflecting her elusive thoughts, which
Albertine would have surreptitiously cast, and which, lending their
mysteriously swift and blue-tinged wings to my own gaze, breathed into
these hitherto entirely natural paths a shiver of the unknown, which my
own desire, if left to its own devices, would not have been able to
elicit, for my own desire held no secrets for me. And sometimes reading
a rather sad novel carried me suddenly backwards, for some novels are
like a period of great mourning which abolishes habit and puts us once
more in touch with the reality of life, but for a few hours only, as
does a nightmare, for the force of habit, the oblivion that it procures
and the gaiety that it restores as the brain is unable to resist them
and re-establish the truth, are infinitely stronger than even the most
hypnotic suggestions of a beautiful book, which, like all suggestions,
have a very fleeting effect. Moreover in Balbec, when I had wanted to
meet Albertine for the first time, was it not because she had seemed to
me to stand for all the girls whose sight had so often rooted me to the
spot in the street or on the road, and because she could provide me with
the quintessence of their lives? And was it not natural now that the
waning star of my love in which they were condensed should be once again
dispersed into this scattered stardust of the galaxies? They all looked
to me like Albertine, the image which I bore within me made me see her
everywhere, and even as I turned a corner in the road, the one I saw
climbing back into a motor-car reminded me so much of her, and her
figure was so similarly shaped, that I wondered for a moment if it
wasn’t Albertine herself that I had seen and if I hadn’t been misled by
the story of her death. I recalled her at just such a bend in the road,
perhaps in Balbec, climbing back into the car in the same way, at a time
when she had so much confidence in life. And as she climbed back into
the car, the girl’s movements not only struck my eyes as do those
superficial visions that we glimpse so fleetingly during a drive: it
became a more durable kind of action and seemed to me also to reach
backwards into the past, through this newly acquired perspective which
pressed so voluptuously and sadly upon my heart.

But the girl had already vanished. A little further on I saw a group of
three slightly older girls, whose smart and athletic demeanour so
perfectly echoed what had seduced me on the first day that I had seen
Albertine and her friends that I followed in the footsteps of these
three new girls, and when they took a carriage, I looked desperately
around me to find one myself, but when I did find one, it was too late.
I was unable to catch up with them. Yet a few days later, as I was going
home, I saw emerging from under the archway of our house the three girls
whom I had followed in the Bois de Boulogne. Although they were just a
little older, they corresponded exactly, especially as far as the two
brunettes were concerned, to those young society ladies whom I had so
often seen from my window or walked past in the street, causing me to
make a thousand plans and fall in love with life, but whom I had never
managed to meet. The blonde one looked more fragile, perhaps sickly
even, and attracted me less. Yet she was the one who made me
dissatisfied with a momentary glance, as I stopped in my tracks and my
eyes took on a fixed stare, as impossible to distract as if they were
concentrating on one of those problems where we knowingly strain to
reach far beyond surface appearances. I would no doubt have let them
disappear like so many others, but just as they passed by, the blonde
girl – was it because I was studying her so attentively? – cast me a
first, furtive look, then, when she had gone past, turned her head back
towards me and cast a second that finally set me alight. However, since
she then lost interest in me and started chatting with her friends
again, my ardour would have finally dampened, had it not been multiplied
a hundredfold by the following fact. When I asked the concierge who they
were, he replied: ‘They asked for Mme la Duchesse. I think only one of
them knows her and that the others only accompanied her to the door.
Here is her name, I don’t know whether I have spelled it right.’ And I
read: Mlle Déporcheville, which I easily corrected to: d’Éporcheville,
that is, more or less, as far as I could recall, the name of the very
well-connected young lady, loosely related to the Guermantes, whom
Robert had mentioned after meeting her in a house of ill-fame and having
been intimate with her. I now understood the significance of the look in
her eyes, why she had turned round and hidden from her companions. How
often I had thought of her, picturing her in terms of the name mentioned
by Robert! And now I had just seen her, no different from her friends,
except for that furtive glance which opened up for me a secret path to
parts of her life which were evidently hidden from her friends, and
which made her seem more accessible to me – already almost half mine –
and more pliant than the usual run of aristocratic young ladies. In her
mind, she already anticipated the hours that we might have shared
together, if she had been free to make an assignation. Was that not what
her eyes had tried to express with an eloquence that only I could read?
My heart beat furiously, I would have been incapable of saying exactly
what Mlle d’Éporcheville looked like, I vaguely recalled a blonde head
seen from the side, but I was madly in love with her. Suddenly I
realized that I was reasoning as if of the three girls Mlle
d’Éporcheville was definitely the blonde one who had turned her head and
looked at me twice. Yet this was not what the concierge had said. I
returned to his lodge to question him again, but he said that he was
unable to answer my question because today was the first time they had
called and it had been while he was out. But he would ask his wife, who
had seen them once before. She was cleaning the servants’ staircase. Who
has not had such delicious doubts during his life, more or less similar
to these? A charitable friend to whom one describes a girl seen at a
ball has deduced that she must be one of his friends and invites you to
meet her. But among so many, and on the basis of a merely verbal
portrait, will there not have been some mistake? Will the girl that you
are about to see be different from the one whom you desire? Or will you
on the contrary see the smiles and the outstretched hand of the girl
that you wanted her to turn out to be? The latter good fortune is not
infrequent and, without always being justified by arguments as decisive
as mine concerning Mlle d’Éporcheville, results from a kind of intuition
and also from the fair wind of fortune that may sometimes favour us, so
that on seeing her we say, ‘She is the one’. I recalled that I had
correctly guessed which one of the little gang of girls walking along
the sea front was called Albertine Simonet. This memory provoked a sharp
but brief pain, and while the concierge went to fetch his wife, my main
thought – thinking of Mlle d’Éporcheville and, as in one of those
moments of waiting where a name or a fact, which you have for some
reason fitted to a face, finds itself momentarily free to float between
several, and ready, if it adheres to a new one, to render
retrospectively the original face which it had brought to your attention
alien, innocent and elusive – was that the concierge was likely to
reveal that Mlle d’Éporcheville was one of the two brunettes. In which
case the being in whose existence I believed would disappear, the being
whom I already loved, who filled me with the desire to possess her, the
blonde and sultry Mlle d’Éporcheville, whom the dread wrong answer would
fatally dissociate into two separate entities, which I had arbitrarily
united as does a novelist who merges diverse entities borrowed from real
life in order to create an imaginary character, but which taken
separately – if the name fails to confirm what the eyes had intended –
would lose all significance, would be dissociated into two separate
elements by the fatal reply. In this case my arguments would come to
naught, but no, on the contrary, how much more strongly they were
vindicated, as the concierge returned to tell me that Mlle
d’Éporcheville was indeed the blonde!

From that moment on I could no longer believe that she was merely her
namesake. The odds were too long against one of these three girls being
called Mlle d’Éporcheville, and, in a first, limited corroboration of my
supposition, being precisely the one who had looked at me in that almost
smiling way and yet not being the one who frequented houses of ill-fame.

Then started a day of wild excitement. Even before going out to buy
every garment that would help me dress up to create the best impression
the day after next, when I would be visiting Mme de Guermantes, in whose
company I would find a young lady of easy virtue and would make an
assignation with her (for I would certainly find a moment to speak with
her in a corner of the drawing-room), in order to make doubly sure I
went out to send a telegram to Robert asking him for the name and the
exact description of the young lady, hoping to have his reply before the
day after next when, according to the concierge, she would return to see
Mme de Guermantes; and when (without thinking for a moment of anything
else, even of Albertine), whatever might happen to me in the meantime,
even if I was ill and had to be taken there in a wheelchair, I would
visit the Duchesse at the same time. If I went to send a telegram to
Saint-Loup, it was not that I had any remaining doubts as to the
identity of the person or that I made any distinction between the girl I
had seen and the one he had described. I had no doubt that they were one
and the same. But in my impatience at waiting for two days, it was a
pleasure for me, it was almost already for me a secret hold over her, to
receive a telegram full of details concerning her. At the telegraph
office, while drafting my telegram with all the excitement of a man
burning with hope, I noted how much less helpless I was now than in my
childhood and in relation to Mlle d’Éporcheville than to Gilberte. I
need do no more than take the simple trouble to write my telegram, and
the clerk had only to accept it, for the swiftest of electric
communications networks to transmit it across the length and breadth of
France, right down to the Mediterranean coast. Robert would bring his
whole libertine past to bear on identifying the person whom I had just
encountered, would place it at the disposal of the fiction that I was
starting to sketch and which I need not even worry about any more, for
the reply would be bound to bring my romance to a conclusion in one way
or another before twenty-four hours had elapsed. Whereas formerly,
brought back from the Champs-Elysées by Françoise and left to foment my
impotent desires alone at home, unable to exploit the technology of
modern civilization, I loved like a savage, or even like a flower, since
I had no right to come and go. From this moment on I spent all my time
in a state of fever; a forty-eight-hour trip that my father asked me to
take with him and which would have made me miss my visit to the Duchesse
sent me into such a state of rage and despair that my mother intervened
and persuaded my father to leave me in Paris. But it took several hours
for my anger to abate, while my desire for Mlle d’Éporcheville had
increased a hundredfold because of the obstacle placed between us, and
my momentary fear that these hours at Mme de Guermantes’, which I
greeted as a well-deserved prize of which no one could deprive me, might
not occur. Some philosophers argue that the external world does not
exist and that it is only within ourselves that our lives evolve. Be
that as it may, love, even in its humblest beginnings, is a striking
example of how little reality means for us. If I had had to draw,
describe or inventory the details of Mlle d’Éporcheville’s features from
memory, or even to recognize her in the street, I would have found it
impossible. I had caught sight of her in profile as she passed, she had
seemed pretty, unaffected, tall and blonde, and I could not have said
more. But all my reactions of desire, anxiety, of mortal shock inspired
by the fear of not seeing her if my father took me with him, all these,
associated with an image which I had in fact invented but which I needed
only to believe attractive, already constituted love. At last the next
morning, after a night of blissful insomnia, I received Saint-Loup’s
telegram: ‘De l’Orgeville, _de_ noble particle, _orge_ barleycorn, as in
rye, _ville_ as in town, short, dark and dumpy, is presently in
Switzerland.’ It was not her!

My mother had brought my mail to my room and placed it casually on the
bed, as if thinking of something else. And as she withdrew immediately
to leave me on my own, she smiled. And knowing my dear mother’s
stratagems and knowing that one could always decipher her expression
with no fear of mistake if one took as its key her desire to please
others, I too smiled, thinking: ‘There is something interesting for me
in the mail, and Mama has adopted her indifferent and absent-minded air
to allow me to enjoy the surprise to the full, so as to avoid being like
those people who ruin half of your pleasure by announcing it in advance.
And she did not stay, because she feared that from pride I would hide
the pleasure I felt, and thus feel it less keenly.’ Meanwhile, as she
was nearing the door, she had met Françoise, who was about to enter my
room with my telegram in her hand. As soon as she had given it to me my
mother forced her to beat a retreat and dragged her outside, flustered,
offended and surprised. For Françoise considered that her duties
included the privilege of entering my room at any time and staying
there, if she wanted to. But already on her face astonishment and anger
had disappeared beneath her sticky black smile of transcendental pity
and philosophical irony, a viscous ointment secreted by her wounded
pride to heal its scar. To avoid feeling despised, she despised us. For
she knew full well that we were masters, that is, capricious creatures
who are not noted for their intellectual brilliance and who enjoy using
fear in order to show plainly that they are the masters, to impose on
those more thinking creatures, their domestic servants, absurd
obligations such as boiling water in times of epidemic, mopping my room
with a wet cloth, and having to leave the room precisely when they had
wanted to enter. Mama had placed my mail right by my side, so that I
could not miss it. But I sensed that there was nothing but newspapers.
No doubt there was some article by an author whom I liked but, because
he wrote infrequently, it would be a surprise for me. I went over to the
window and drew back the curtains. Above the pale misty daylight the
sky, which was as pink as the stoves that are lit in the kitchens at
this time of day, filled me with hope and the urge to spend the night
and wake up in the morning at the little mountain resort where I had
seen the pink-cheeked milkmaid. I opened the _Figaro_. How tedious! The
leading article bore precisely the same title as the one which I had
submitted but which had not been published.² But not only the same
title, here and there were one or two identical words. That was too
much. I would write in to complain. And I heard Françoise, who was
indignant at having been expelled from my room where she considered that
she was free to come and go as she pleased, grumbling: ‘The very idea! A
child that I saw born. Of course I didn’t see him when his mother bore
him, but let me tell you that when I first met him he hadn’t been born
for more than five years!’ But there were not just those few words,
there was everything, even my signature … It was my article, which had
at last appeared! But my mind, which already in those days had started
to age and to tire a little, continued for a moment to reason as if it
had not understood that it was my own article, like those old men who
are obliged to continue with a movement once they have started, even if
it has become pointless, even if an unforeseen obstacle which they
should immediately avoid has rendered it dangerous. Then I considered
the spiritual bread that a newspaper constitutes, still warm and moist
as it emerges from the press and the morning mist in which it has been
delivered at crack of dawn to the housemaids who take it to their
masters with a bowl of milk, this miraculous loaf, multiplied
ten-thousandfold and yet unique, which stays unchanged for everyone
while proliferating across every threshold.

What I was holding in my hand was not one particular copy of the
newspaper, it was any one out of ten thousand; it was not only something
written by me, it was something written by me and read by everyone. To
appreciate the exact phenomenon as it occurs in each household, I must
read this article not as an author but as one of the other readers of
the newspaper; what I was holding in my hand was not just what I had
written, it was the symbol of its incarnation in so many minds. Thus in
order to read it I must for a moment stop being its author and become an
ordinary reader of the newspaper. But now I feel a first pang of
anxiety. Will the unsuspecting reader see this article? I open the
newspaper absent-mindedly as would this unsuspecting reader, even
wearing on my face my usual expression of not knowing what there is in
the newspaper this morning and being impatient to look at the social or
political news. But my article is so long that my eyes, which are trying
to avoid it (to respect the truth and not load the dice in my favour,
just as someone who is waiting deliberately counts too slowly), cannot
help chancing on an extract in passing. Yet many of those who notice the
leading article, and even of those who read it, do not look at the
signature. Even I would have been unable to say who had written the
leading article the day before. And now I promise myself always to read
them and their author’s name; but like a jealous lover, who avoids
deceiving his mistress in order to make himself believe in her fidelity,
I think sadly that my future attentions will not compel, as they have
not compelled, the reciprocal attentions of others. And then there are
the people who have gone out hunting and those who have left for work
too early. And yet, some people will still read it. I follow their
example. I make a start. As I read the article, even though I know that
many of the people who read it will detest it, what I see behind each
word seems to be printed there in black and white, I cannot believe that
anyone who casts his eyes upon it will not see exactly the same images
as those I see, for I assume, with all the naïvety of those who believe
that it is the actual words we utter which travel down the telephone
wires, that the author’s thoughts are directly perceived by the reader,
whereas it is other thoughts which are constructed in his mind; at the
very moment when I am trying to be the ordinary reader, my mind, as I
read, is rewriting the article. If M. de Guermantes did not understand
such and such a phrase that Bloch would appreciate, he was able on the
other hand to smile at some remark that Bloch would treat with disdain.
Thus each passage that a previous reader seemed to cast aside would
attract a new admirer, the whole of the article would be praised to the
skies by the masses and would overcome my own self-doubt so that I would
no longer need to defend it myself. For in truth the quality of an
article, however remarkable, is similar to that of those sentences in
Parliamentary reports where the words ‘We shall have to see’ uttered by
the minister only take on their full import in the following context:
‘THE PRIME MINISTER, MINISTER FOR HOME AND RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS: We shall
have to see. (_Loud exclamations on the far left. “Hear, hear!” on some
of the left and centre benches_)’ (an ending which is finer than the
middle of the passage, worthy of its beginning): for part of its beauty
– and this is the original sin in this kind of literature, from which
even the famous _Lundis_³ are not exempt – lies in the impression which
it produces on its readers. It is a collective Venus, of which we grasp
only a severed limb if we merely take account of the author’s thought,
for this is completely realized only in the minds of its readers. That
is where all is accomplished. And as a crowd, however select, is not an
artist, its ultimate seal of approval always retains something of the
common touch. Thus Sainte-Beuve, on Mondays, could imagine Mme de
Boigne⁴ in her four-poster bed reading his article in the
_Constitutionnel_, appreciating some elegant phrase which he had
lovingly crafted and which would perhaps never have materialized had he
not seen fit to pack it into his weekly column in order to broaden its
appeal. No doubt the chancellor, reading it himself, elsewhere, would
mention it to his old companion when he visited her later. And taking
him back that evening in his carriage, the Duc de Noailles in his grey
suit would tell Sainte-Beuve what society had thought of it, if a
comment by Mme d’Arbouville had not already informed him. And countering
my own self-doubt with the ten thousand voices of approval that
supported me, I drew as great a feeling of strength and of belief in my
talent from the reading which I was undertaking at this moment as I had
drawn self-doubt when what I had written was addressed only to me. I saw
my thoughts or even, failing my thoughts, for those who were unable to
understand them, the repetition of my name and a kind of glorified echo
of my person radiate over so many people at that very moment, colouring
their thoughts with a dawning light which filled me with more strength
and triumphal joy than the rosy fingers of dawn which pressed
simultaneously at countless window panes. I saw Bloch, the Guermantes,
Legrandin and Andrée drawing from each sentence the images contained in
the article; and now, at the very moment when I am trying to be an
ordinary reader, I am reading as an author, albeit not only as an
author. So as to help the impossible creature that I am trying to become
to reconcile all the contradictions in the way most favourable to me,
although I am reading as an author, I am judging as a reader, making
none of the demands that a piece of writing faces from the person who
expects it to match up to the ideal which he wanted it to express. When
I wrote them, the sentences of my article were so weak compared to my
thought, so complicated and opaque compared to my harmonious and
transparent vision, so full of gaps which I had not managed to fill,
that reading them caused me to suffer, they had only accentuated my
feelings of impotence and an incurable lack of talent. But now in
forcing myself to become a reader, if I delegated to others the painful
duty of judging me, I was at least able to wipe the slate clean of what
I had intended to do, by reading what I had done. I read the article,
struggling to convince myself that it had been written by someone else.
Then all my images, all my reflections and all my epithets, taken in
themselves and with no memory of the failure of my aims that they
represented, charmed me with their brilliance, their novelty and their
profundity. And when I sensed too great a failure, I took refuge in the
soul of your average admiring reader, and said: ‘Well, how could a
reader notice that? There may be something lacking there, I admit. But
heavens above, they ought to count themselves lucky! It’s full enough of
good things as it is, far more than they usually get.’

Thus, hardly had I finished this reassuring reading than, despite not
having dared reread my own manuscript, I wanted to start rereading it
immediately, there being nothing better suited to the dictum ‘if you can
read it once you can read it twice’ than an old article by oneself. I
promised myself that I would ask Françoise to buy more copies, I would
tell her they were to give to my friends, but in fact it would be to
hold in my hands the miracle of my self-multiplying thought and read the
same pages in a different copy, as if each time I were a different
gentleman opening the _Figaro_. This turned out to be the same day when
I intended to go to the Guermantes’, whom I had not seen for ages, in
order to meet Mlle d’Éporcheville, and during my visit I would find out
from them what opinion people had formed of my article.

I imagined one such female reader in her bedroom, which I would have so
liked to enter, to whom the newspaper would bring, if not my thoughts,
which she would not be able to understand, at least my name as if in
homage to me. But homage paid to something we do not care for is no more
able to sway our hearts than the thoughts of a mind which we cannot
understand are able to move our minds. As for other friends, I argued
that, if the state of my health continued to deteriorate and if I could
no longer see them, it would be pleasant to continue to write, to retain
access to them in this way, to speak to them between the lines, to get
them to follow my own trains of thought, to please them and be welcomed
into their hearts. This is what I told myself, for social relations had
until then figured as part of my daily life, so I was frightened by a
future that might hold no place for them, and I found solace in this
expedient which would enable me to retain my friends’ interest, perhaps
elicit their admiration, until the day when I would be well enough to
start to visit them again; this is what I thought, but still I realized
that it was not true, that although I liked to imagine their attention
as the object of my pleasure, this pleasure was profoundly internal and
spiritual, a supreme pleasure which they could not provide and which I
could find not through conversing with them, but through writing at a
distance; and I felt that, if I started to write, in order to meet them
indirectly, to give them the best impression of me, to prepare a better
social situation for me, perhaps writing might alleviate the desire to
meet them and with it the social situation that literature might perhaps
have procured me, and I would no longer want to enjoy it, for my
pleasure would no longer be in society but in literature.

So after luncheon, when I went to visit Mme de Guermantes it was less on
account of Mlle d’Éporcheville, who because of Saint-Loup’s telegram had
lost the better part of her character, than to see in the Duchesse
herself one of those ladies who might have read my article and who might
enable me to imagine what the public who subscribed to or bought the
_Figaro_ would have thought of it. Apart from which, it was not without
pleasure that I went to visit her. It was all very well in my eyes to
tell myself that what marked out her salon from the others for me was
the long period it had spent waiting in my imagination, yet knowing the
reason for this difference did not eliminate it. Moreover, there were
for me several versions of the name of Guermantes. If the one which my
memory had inscribed merely as in an address book was accompanied by no
poetry, older versions, those which went back to the time when I did not
know Mme de Guermantes, were liable to take shape again within me,
especially when I had not seen her for some time and the crude light of
the person with her human face did not extinguish the mysterious
radiance of the name. Then once again I would start to think of Mme de
Guermantes’s dwelling as something beyond the real, in the same way as I
used to start thinking of Balbec through the mist of my earliest
day-dreams and as though I had not since then made the journey there, as
though I had never taken the ten-to-two train. I would forget for a
moment my knowledge that none of this existed, as we sometimes think of
someone we love, forgetting for a moment that they are dead. Then
notions of reality returned as I entered the Duchesse’s hall. But I
consoled myself with the thought that she was none the less for me the
true point of intersection between dream and reality.

As I entered the drawing-room, I saw the young blonde lady whom I had
believed for twenty-four hours to be the one referred to by Saint-Loup.
She herself asked the Duchesse to ‘reintroduce’ me to her. And in fact
from the moment I arrived I had the feeling that I knew her rather well,
but this feeling was dispelled by the Duchesse, who said to me, ‘Oh, you
have already met Mlle de Forcheville.’ Whereas on the contrary I was
quite sure that I had never been introduced to any young lady of that
name, which would certainly have struck me, as it was so familiar to my
memory since I had heard the retrospective account of Odette’s love
affairs and Swann’s jealousy. In itself my twofold misunderstanding of
the name, recalling ‘de l’Orgeville’ as being ‘d’Éporcheville’ and
having reconstrued as ‘Éporcheville’ what was really ‘Forcheville’, was
far from extraordinary. Our error stems from believing that things
habitually appear to us as they are in reality, names as they are
written, people as the static concepts presented by photography and
psychology. But in fact reality is not at all what we usually perceive.
We see, hear and conceive the world inside out and back to front. We
repeat a name as we first heard it, until experience rectifies the error
– but this does not always happen. Everyone in Combray spoke to
Françoise of Mme Sazerat, and yet Françoise continued to call her Mme
Sazerin, not through that wilful and proud persistance in error that was
her habit, a habit which was only confirmed by our disagreement and
which was the only concession to the egalitarian principles of 1789
which she allowed to modify the traditional French values of
Saint-André-des-Champs (she claimed only one of her citizen’s rights,
that of pronouncing differently from us and maintaining that ‘hôtel’,
‘été’ and ‘air’ were of feminine gender), but because in fact she still
continued to hear it as ‘Sazerin’. This perpetual error, which is
nothing but ‘life’ itself, does not invest with its thousand forms the
visible and audible universes alone but also the social, sentimental,
historical and other universes, too. As far as the wife of the High
Court judge is concerned, the Princess of Luxembourg is little more than
a tart and is, moreover, of little interest; what does take on more
interest, where Swann is concerned, is the fact that Odette is a morally
fastidious lady, and he constructs a whole fiction on the subject, which
becomes all the more painful when he understands his error; what is even
more significant is that in the eyes of the Germans the French dream
only of revenge. We have only formless, fragmented visions of the world,
which we fill out with arbitrary associations of ideas, creating
dangerous suggestions. I should not therefore have been very surprised
to hear the name Forcheville (and already I was wondering whether she
was related to the Forcheville whom I had heard so much about) if the
blonde girl, doubtless hoping tactfully to forestall questions which she
might have found unpleasant, had not straight away said to me: ‘Don’t
you remember that you used to know me very well, you used to visit my
house, I am your friend Gilberte. I realized that you did not recognize
me. But I recognized you straight away.’ (She said this as if she had
recognized me the moment I entered the drawing-room but the truth is
that she had recognized me in the street and had greeted me, for later
Mme de Guermantes told me that she had told her, as if it were most
amusing and quite extraordinary, that I had followed her and brushed up
against her as if I had mistaken her for a tart.) It was only after she
had left that I learned why she was called Mlle de Forcheville. After
Swann’s death, Odette, who surprised everyone with her profound,
prolonged and sincere suffering, found that she had become a very rich
widow. Forcheville married her, after undertaking a long round of
châteaux and reassuring himself that his family would accept his wife.
(The family protested mildly but yielded to the overwhelming argument of
no longer having to subsidize the expenses of a needy relative once he
proposed to move from imminent poverty to sudden opulence.) Soon
afterwards one of Swann’s uncles, into whose hands an enormous fortune
had fallen after the successive demise of a number of relatives, died,
leaving this whole fortune to Gilberte, who thus became one of the
richest heiresses in France. But this was the time when the aftermath of
the Dreyfus case gave rise to an anti-Semitic movement, in conjunction
with a movement towards a greater infiltration of society by the
children of Israel. The politicians were not wrong to think that the
discovery of the judicial error would strike a blow against
anti-Semitism. But, at least in the short term, anti-Semitism in high
society was on the contrary augmented and exacerbated. Forcheville, who
like any self-respecting nobleman had drawn from family discussions the
certainty that his name was more ancient than that of La Rochefoucauld,
considered that in marrying the widow of a Jew he had acted with the
same charitable spirit as a millionaire who picks up a prostitute in the
street and saves her from poverty and the gutter. He was ready to extend
his generous principles to include the very person of Gilberte, whose
countless millions could hardly fail to help, but whose absurd name,
Swann, made the marriage embarrassing. He declared that he would adopt
her. As we know, Mme de Guermantes, to the astonishment of her social
circle – which she was accustomed and delighted to provoke – had refused
to talk to Swann’s wife or his daughter after his marriage. This refusal
had appeared all the more cruel in as much as what had for so long made
his marriage with Odette appear viable was the likely introduction of
his daughter to Mme de Guermantes. And no doubt, with all his experience
of life, he should have known that these scenes which we picture never
come true, for various reasons but among them one which made him think
of this lost introduction with little regret. This reason is that –
whatever the picture, from eating a trout at sunset, which inspires a
stay-at-home man to take the train, to the desire to dazzle a
high-minded cashier one evening by drawing up at her front door in a
splendid carriage, which decides an unscrupulous man either to commit a
murder or to yearn for the death and legacy of his family and, according
to whether he is brave or lazy, either to rush to put his ideals into
practice or to stay musing over the first step to take – the action
which is destined to enable us to complete the picture, whether this
action be a journey, a marriage, a crime, or whatever, changes us so
profoundly that we attach no further importance to the reason which
drove us to perform it in the first place. It may even happen that we
never again see in our mind’s eye the picture formulated by us when we
were not yet the man who was to become the traveller, the husband, the
criminal, or the recluse (the man who set to work in search of fame but
has, through this very effort, become detached from the desire for
fame), etc. Moreover, even if we did try obstinately to avoid acting in
vain, it is probable that the effect of the sunset would not be
repeated, that when the moment arrived we would feel cold and prefer hot
soup by the fireside rather than trout alfresco, that our carriage would
fail to impress the cashier, who might have had considerable esteem for
us for entirely different reasons but who might feel suspicious of this
sudden display of wealth. In short, we saw Swann, once married, attach
importance above all to the relations of his wife and his daughter with
Mme Bontemps and the like.

To all the reasons, arising from the Guermantes’ manner of interpreting
social affairs, which had decided the Duchesse never to have Mme and
Mlle Swann introduced to her, we may also add the untroubled confidence
with which people who are not in love keep their distance from anything
they blame in lovers, explain it away by the fact that they are in love.
‘Oh I don’t have anything to do with all that; if it amuses poor Swann
to play the fool and ruin his life that’s his business, but you never
know with that kind of thing, it could all turn out for the worst, I let
them get on with it.’ This was the _suave mari magno_⁵ that Swann
himself advised me to adopt towards the Verdurins when he had long since
ceased to be Odette’s lover and was no longer interested in the little
set. It is what allows third parties to render such wise verdicts on
passions which they do not themselves feel and on the complicated
behaviour which these passions involve. Mme de Guermantes had in fact
applied herself to ostracizing Mme and Mlle Swann with a tenacity that
astonished people. When Mme Molé and Mme de Marsantes had started to
frequent Mme Swann and to bring a great number of society ladies round
to visit her, not only did Mme de Guermantes remain intractable but she
managed to cut all their ties and to persuade her cousin the Princesse
de Guermantes to follow suit. On one of the most serious days of crisis
under Rouvier’s⁶ government, when it looked as if there would be war
between France and Germany, I happened to be dining alone with M. de
Bréauté at Mme de Guermantes’s, and found the Duchesse looking worried.
I had imagined, since she tended to be preoccupied with politics, that
she wished thereby to show her fear of a war, as one day when she had
sat down to dinner with such a careworn expression and had responded in
such terse monosyllables to someone who enquired timidly as to the
source of her concern, she had answered with gravity, ‘I fret for
China.’ But now a little later Mme de Guermantes herself explained the
preoccupied air which I had attributed to the fear of a declaration of
war, saying to M. de Bréauté: ‘I hear that Marie-Aynard wants to offer
the Swanns a place in society. I absolutely must go to see
Marie-Gilberte tomorrow to ask her to help put a stop to that. Otherwise
there will be no society left. The Dreyfus case is all very well. But
then the grocer’s wife down the road only has to say she’s a nationalist
and ask to be invited by us.’ And hearing such a frivolous remark
instead of the one that I expected, I felt the astonishment of a reader
who looks in the usual place in the _Figaro_ for the latest news of the
Russo-Japanese war and finds himself faced instead with the list of
people who contributed gifts to Mlle de Mortemart’s wedding list,⁷ the
importance of an aristocratic marriage having pushed battles both on
land and on sea to the back of the newspaper. Moreover, from her pride
in this extravagantly protracted persistence, the Duchesse ultimately
acquired feelings of satisfaction which she lost no opportunity to
express. ‘Babal’, she said, ‘claims that we are the two most elegant
people in Paris because only he and I refuse to be greeted by Mme and
Mlle Swann. You see he is convinced that elegance consists in not
knowing Mme Swann.’ And the Duchesse laughed heartily.

However, after Swann’s death, it happened that her insistence on not
inviting his daughter had provided Mme de Guermantes with all the
satisfactions of pride, independence, ‘self-government’ and persecution
that she was able to enjoy, and that these satisfactions were terminated
by the disappearance of the person who gave her the delicious sensation
that she was resisting him and that he was unable to get her to annul
her decrees. So the Duchesse had passed on to the promulgation of other
decrees, which, applied to living persons, were able to make her feel
that she was sole mistress of all her actions. She had not given a
thought to the Swann girl, but when people mentioned her the Duchesse
felt a curiosity, as for a place never visited, which was no longer
obscured by her desire to resist Swann’s claims for attention. Besides,
so many different feelings can come together to form one single feeling
that it would be impossible to say whether one might not detect some
affection for Swann in this concern. Doubtless – for at every level of
society a frivolous social life paralyses sensitivities and
incapacitates our power to resuscitate the dead – the Duchesse was one
of those people who need someone’s presence – that presence which as a
true Guermantes she excelled at cultivating – if she were truly to love
them, but also, more unusually, if she were to feel a little genuine
hatred. So that often her kind feelings for people, interrupted during
their lifetime by the irritation that one or other of their acts had
occasioned, were revived by their death. She then experienced something
approaching a desire for reparation, because she imagined them, however
vaguely, with only their good qualities and free from the petty smugness
and pretensions that had annoyed her during their lifetime. Despite Mme
de Guermantes’s frivolity, this sometimes lent a rather noble quality –
however mingled with baseness – to her behaviour. For whereas
three-quarters of the human race flatter the living and take no notice
of the dead, she often put on a performance for those she had mistreated
during their lifetime once they were dead.

As for Gilberte, no one who loved her and valued her self-respect could
have failed to rejoice in the change in the Duchesse’s dispositions
towards her, in so far as they hoped that Gilberte, by contemptuously
repulsing advances coming after twenty-five years of offence, could be
finally avenged. But unfortunately our moral reflexes are not always
identical with the promptings of common sense. A person who thinks that
some ill-judged insult has spoiled his chances with a person he holds
dear, may find on the contrary that it has salvaged them. Gilberte, who
was fairly indifferent towards people who were pleasant to her, could
not stop thinking with admiration of the insolent Mme de Guermantes and,
pondering the reasons for this insolence, even wanted to write to the
Duchesse on one occasion, although this would have caused those who felt
the least friendship for her to die of shame, to ask her what she had
against a girl who had done her no wrong. The Guermantes had taken on in
her eyes proportions that their nobility alone could not have given
them. She placed them not only above all the nobility but even above all
royalty.

A few ladies who had previously been friends of Swann looked after
Gilberte very carefully. Her most recent inheritance became known in
aristocratic circles, people noted her exquisite manners and her
potential as a charming wife. People said that a cousin of Mme de
Guermantes, the Princesse de Nièvre, was thinking of Gilberte for her
son. Mme de Guermantes loathed Mme de Nièvre. She announced to all and
sundry that such a marriage would be a scandal. Mme de Nièvre took
fright and protested that she had never even thought of it. One day
after luncheon, since it was fine and M. de Guermantes was due to go out
with his wife, Mme de Guermantes was adjusting her hat in the mirror,
gazing at her own blue eyes and her still blonde hair, while the
chambermaid held out various parasols for her mistress to choose from.
The window was bathed in sunlight and they had decided to make the most
of the fine day by paying a visit to Saint-Cloud. M. de Guermantes, who
was ready to leave, having donned his topper and his pearl-grey gloves,
said to himself, ‘Oriane is still truly astonishing. I find her
delicious.’ And seeing that his wife seemed in good humour, he said: ‘By
the way, I had a message for you from Mme de Virelef. She wanted to ask
you to come to the opera on Monday. But, as she is taking the Swann
girl, she dared not ask and begged me to test the water. I have no
opinion, I am simply transmitting the message. Good heavens, I wonder if
we might not …’ he added evasively, for since their attitude towards any
person was a collective attitude and arose identically in each of them,
he knew within himself that his wife’s hostility towards Mlle Swann had
abated and that she was curious to meet her. Mme de Guermantes finished
adjusting her veil and chose a parasol. ‘But as you wish, what should it
matter to me? I see no objection to our meeting the girl. You know
perfectly well that I have never had anything _against_ her. It was
simply that I did not want us to appear to be making advances to my
friends’ irregular connections. That’s all.’ ‘And you were perfectly
right,’ replied the Duc. ‘You are the soul of wisdom, Madam, and what is
more, you look ravishing in that hat.’ ‘How very kind of you,’ said Mme
de Guermantes, smiling at her husband and moving towards the door. But
before entering the carriage, she felt obliged to offer supplementary
information: ‘There are so many people now who invite her mother,
besides which she has the good sense to be ill for three-quarters of the
year. They say the little girl is quite charming. Everyone knows that we
were great friends of Swann. Everyone will find it perfectly natural.’
And they left together for Saint-Cloud.

A month later Swann’s young daughter, who was not yet called
Forcheville, was at luncheon with the Guermantes. They talked about all
sorts of things; at the end of the luncheon, Gilberte said shyly, ‘I
believe that you knew my father very well.’ ‘But of course we did,’ said
Mme de Guermantes, with a melancholy air which proved that she
understood the grief of a daughter and with an intentional overemphasis
which made her appear to dissimulate the fact that she was not sure she
could recall the father very precisely. ‘We knew him very well, I
remember him very well indeed.’ (And well she might have remembered him,
indeed, since he had called on her every day for twenty-five years.) ‘I
know perfectly well who he was, let me tell you,’ she added, as if she
were seeking to explain to the daughter who her father had been and to
offer the girl new information about him, ‘he was a great friend of my
mother-in-law and also well known to my brother-in-law Palamède.’ ‘He
used to visit us, too, and even came to luncheon,’ added M de
Guermantes, displaying both his modesty and his concern for detail. ‘I’m
sure you remember, Oriane. What a good man your father was! How clear it
was that he must spring from a worthy family! In fact I did once catch
sight of his father and mother. What fine people they all were!’ One
felt that if the parents and their son had still been alive the Duc de
Guermantes would have felt no hesitation in recommending them for
employment as gardeners. But this is how the Faubourg Saint-Germain
speaks to the bourgeoisie about anyone from the bourgeoisie, whether to
flatter their listeners with the exception made in their favour for as
long as the conversation lasts, or whether, preferably, to humiliate
them at one and the same time. So it is when an anti-Semite tells a Jew
of the faults of Jews in general while smothering him with affable
remarks, thus enjoying being hurtful without seeming to be rude.

But since, when she saw you, she knew to perfection how to make you feel
wanted and found it difficult to decide to allow you to leave, Mme de
Guermantes was also a slave to this need for people’s presence. On
occasion, in the heat of an animated conversation, Swann might have
deluded the Duchesse into feeling that she felt friendship for him, but
now he was no longer able. ‘He was charming,’ said the Duchesse with a
sad smile, casting an extremely tender gaze in Gilberte’s direction just
in case the girl should happen to be a sensitive soul, to show her that
she was understood and that if she had been alone with her and if
circumstances had permitted, Mme de Guermantes would have loved to
reveal to her the full extent of her sensitivity. But M. de Guermantes,
whether because he felt that these were precisely the circumstances
which failed to warrant such effusion or because he considered that any
exaggerated expression of sentiment was a woman’s affair and that men
had no more to do with this than with any other feminine concern except
for menus and wine lists, which he had appropriated since he was better
informed in these matters than the Duchesse, judged it wise not to
encourage with any personal contribution a conversation that he listened
to with visible impatience. Moreover, once her outburst of sensitivity
had abated, Mme de Guermantes added a note of social frivolity by
telling Gilberte: ‘Just fancy, let me tell you that he was a _g-g-great_
friend of my brother-in-law Charlus and also very much at home at
Voisenon (the Prince de Guermantes’s château),’ not only as though Swann
had happened to come to know M. de Charlus and the Prince quite by
chance, as if the Duchesse’s brother-in-law and her cousin had been two
men whom Swann had encountered on some random occasion, whereas Swann
was on familiar terms with everyone in that same social circle, but also
as though Mme de Guermantes had wanted Gilberte to understand what sort
of a man her father was, to ‘place’ him for her, through one of those
typical reactions whereby, when we want to explain how we have met
someone we are not supposed to know or want to make the account more
striking, we invoke the patronage of someone else. As for Gilberte, she
was all the happier to see the conversation falter since she wanted
nothing better than to change tack, having inherited from Swann an
exquisite tact and a charming intelligence which the Duc and the
Duchesse recognized and appreciated, asking Gilberte to call again soon.
Moreover, with that attention to detail typical of people whose lives
have no aim, they sometimes descried in the people whom they frequented
the most simple qualities, crying out in admiration with the naïve
wonder of the town-dweller who discovers a blade of grass in the
countryside or, on the contrary, magnifying their tiniest faults, as if
under a microscope, with hair-splitting analyses and visceral
objections, and often alternately in the same person. In Gilberte’s case
it was at first her attractions which excited the idle perspicacity of
M. and Mme de Guermantes: ‘Have you noticed the way she pronounces
certain words,’ the Duchesse asked her husband when she had left, ‘a
typical Swann, it sounded like the man himself. – I was about to make
the same remark as you, Oriane. – She has wit, she has exactly her
father’s turn of phrase. – I find even that she is far superior. Just
remember how well she told that story about the seaside, she has a brio
that Swann did not have. – Oh but he was very witty, after all. – But I
don’t mean that he wasn’t witty, I only said that he did not have such
brio,’ said M de Guermantes with a plaintive air, for his gout made him
over-sensitive and, when there was nobody else to bear witness to his
irritation, he displayed it to the Duchesse. But since he was unable to
understand the deeper reasons, he preferred to affect a misunderstood
air.

The favourable stance adopted by the Duc and the Duchesse meant that
people might henceforth have dropped the words ‘your poor father’ to
Gilberte when the occasion arose, had they not become pointless, since
this was precisely the period when Forcheville adopted the young lady.
She called Forcheville ‘father’, she charmed dowagers with her
politeness and elegant manners, and people admitted that, while
Forcheville had behaved admirably towards her, the little girl was very
kind-hearted and had shown due gratitude. Doubtless because she
sometimes wanted and felt able to show how much she felt at her ease in
society, she had sought my approbation and had spoken of her real father
in my hearing. But this was an exception, for no one dared pronounce
Swann’s name in her presence. It so happened that on entering the salon,
I had just recognized two drawings by Elstir which had previously been
relegated to an upstairs display cabinet where I had only come across
them by chance. Elstir was now in fashion. Mme de Guermantes could not
console herself for having given so many of his pictures to her cousin,
not because they had become fashionable but because now she appreciated
them. In fact fashion is composed of the enthusiasm of a group of people
of whom the Guermantes are typical. But she would not dream of buying
more pictures by him, since in recent times they had been attaining
ridiculously high prices. She wanted to have something at least by
Elstir in her drawing-room and had had the two drawings brought down,
declaring that she ‘preferred them to his paintings’. Gilberte
recognized his style. ‘They look like Elstirs,’ she said. ‘But they
are,’ replied the Duchesse, ‘it was precisely your … some friends of
ours who advised us to buy them. They are admirable. In my opinion they
are better than his paintings.’ I had not heard this dialogue when I
went to look at the drawings, and said, ‘Oh look, it’s the Elstir that
…’ I saw Mme de Guermantes’s frantic signals. ‘Oh yes, it’s the Elstir
that I admired upstairs. It looks much better here than on the landing.
On the subject of Elstir, I mentioned him in an article in the _Figaro_
yesterday. Did you read it? – You wrote an article in the _Figaro?_’
exclaimed M. de Guermantes as violently as he would have exclaimed, ‘But
she’s my cousin. – Yes, yesterday. – In the _Figaro_, are you sure? That
would be surprising, for we each have our own copy, and if one of us
missed it the other would have noticed it. Don’t you agree, Oriane,
there was no article.’ The Duc sent someone to fetch the _Figaro_ and
only accepted the truth when faced with the evidence, as if until that
moment it was most likely that I had mistaken the newspaper for which I
had written. ‘What? I don’t understand, do you mean you have written an
article for the _Figaro_?’ the Duchesse asked me, making an effort to
speak of something of no interest to her. ‘Well, Basin, look here, you
must read it later on.’ ‘Oh no, the Duc is fine as he is with his great
beard all over the newspaper,’ said Gilberte, and I shall read it myself
as soon as I get home. – Yes, he’s taken to wearing a beard now that
everyone is clean shaven, said the Duchesse, he never does what other
people do. When we married he shaved off not just his beard but his
moustache. The country folk who saw him thought that he was not French.
At that time he was called the Prince des Laumes. – Is there still a
Prince des Laumes?’ asked Gilberte, who was interested in anything that
concerned the people who had for so long refused to give her the time of
day. ‘Oh no,’ replied the Duchesse, with a melancholy, amorous air.
‘Such a lovely title! One of the finest titles in France!’ said
Gilberte, in one of those lapses into banality which inevitably escape
the mouths of certain intelligent young women, as surely as the sun
rises. ‘But it’s true, and I regret it as much as you. Basin would like
his sister’s son to take it on, but it’s not the same thing; actually it
would be possible, because it doesn’t have to be the elder son, it can
pass from the elder to the younger. As I was saying, Basin was
absolutely clean shaven; one day on a pilgrimage, do you remember, my
dear,’ she said to her husband, ‘that pilgrimage to Paray-le-Monial? My
brother-in-law Charlus, who rather likes to talk to the country folk,
said to someone or other: “Where are you from, my friend?”, and as he is
very generous, he gave them a tip or offered to stand them a drink. For
there’s nobody more grand but simple with it than Mémé. You could find
him snubbing a duchess if she’s not enough of a duchess for him, and
turn all his attention to a master of hounds. So I said to Basin: “Look,
Basin, why don’t you talk to them a bit too.” My husband, who rather
lacks imagination … – Thank you, Oriane,’ said the Duc without
interrupting his reading of my article, in which he was immersed – ‘got
hold of a local and repeated verbatim the words of his brother: “And
you, where are you from? – I’m from les Laumes. – You are from les
Laumes? Well then, I am your Prince.” Then the countryman looked at
Basin’s whiskerless features and replied: “Not true, you are an
English.” ’ Thus in the Duchesse’s anecdotes one saw these great titles,
like that of the Prince des Laumes, emerge in their true place, in their
former state and their local colour, as in certain books of hours one
recognizes, amidst the medieval crowd, the steeple of Bourges. Some
visiting cards left by a footman were brought in to her. ‘I don’t know
what has possessed her, I do not know the woman. This is your doing,
Basin. And yet you have scarcely made a success of this kind of
relationship, my poor dear,’ and then turning to Gilberte, she said: ‘I
couldn’t begin to explain who she is, you certainly don’t know her,
she’s called Lady Rufus Israel.’ Gilberte blushed furiously: ‘I don’t
know her,’ she said (which was all the more false since Lady Israel, two
years before Swann’s death, had made her peace with him and since then
called Gilberte by her first name), ‘but I do know who she is from what
people say, I know who you mean.’ The fact is that Gilberte had become
quite snobbish. Thus it happened one day, when a young lady who, whether
from malice or from tactlessness, had asked her the name of her true
rather than of her adoptive father, that Gilberte, in her confusion and
in an attempt to disguise what she was forced to say, had pronounced the
name as ‘Svann’ instead of ‘Souann’, a change which some time later she
realized was pejorative, since it turned an originally English name into
a German name. And she had even added, abasing herself morally in order
to enhance her social status: ‘I have heard so many different things
about my birth that I prefer to know nothing.’

However ashamed of herself Gilberte must have been at certain moments
when she thought of her parents (for even Mme Swann had seemed a good
mother to her and had been one) at having adopted such an attitude to
life, we must unfortunately suppose that its elements had doubtless been
borrowed from her parents, for we do not create ourselves single-handed.
But to the quantity of egoism given in the mother, a different portion
of egoism, inherent in the father’s family, comes to accrue, which does
not always imply an addition or even a simple multiplication, but which
creates a new breed of egoism, infinitely more powerful and fearsome.
And ever since the beginning of the world, since families where such a
flaw exists in one form have become allied with families where the same
flaw exists in another form, creating a particularly complete and
detestable form in the child, the accumulated egoisms (to talk here only
of egoism) would take on such force that the whole of humanity would be
destroyed, if from the same ill there did not arise, capable of reducing
it to its just proportions, natural restrictions analogous to those
which prevent an infinite proliferation of protozoa from annihilating
our planet or the monosexual fertilization of plants from leading to the
asphyxiation of the rest of the vegetable kingdom, and so on. From time
to time a virtue emerges to compose with this egoism a new and
disinterested force. The combinations by means of which moral chemistry
thus fixes and renders inoffensive down the generations elements which
were becoming too dangerous are infinite and would be capable of giving
an exciting variety to our family histories. What is more, the different
kinds of egoism of the sort which Gilberte must have accumulated coexist
with the most charming virtues, also inherited from the parents, which
come for a moment to play their own individual, touching and entirely
sincere part during the intervals. Doubtless Gilberte did not always go
so far as she did on this occasion when she insinuated that she was
perhaps the natural daughter of some great personage; but she did most
often dissimulate her origins. Perhaps it was simply too unpleasant to
confess them, and she preferred them to be related by others. Perhaps
she really believed that she was hiding them, with that faltering belief
which is still not doubt, as it reserves a possibility for what one
desires and of which Musset gives an example when he speaks of ‘hoping
in God’.⁸

‘I do not know her personally,’ continued Gilberte. Had she, however, in
calling herself Mlle de Forcheville hoped that no one would know that
she was Swann’s daughter? Perhaps hoping, where certain people were
concerned, that this might in due course come to include almost
everyone? She could not have harboured many illusions as to their
present number and she must have known that many people would be
whispering, ‘She’s Swann’s daughter.’ But she knew it only with the kind
of knowledge that tells us of people yielding to despair and letting
themselves die of starvation while we go off to a ball, that is with a
vague and distant knowledge, for which we have no desire to substitute a
more precise knowledge based on first-hand experience. As distance makes
things appear smaller, less precise and less dangerous, Gilberte thought
it pointless that the discovery that she had been born a Swann should be
made in her presence. Gilberte belonged, or at least had belonged during
those years, to the most frequently encountered species of human
ostrich, those who bury their heads in the hope, not of not being seen,
which they believe to be implausible, but of not seeing themselves being
seen, which seems important enough to them and allows them to leave the
rest to chance. Gilberte preferred not to be present when people
discovered that she had been born a Swann. And as we are present to
people whom we can picture, and since we can picture people reading
their newspapers, Gilberte preferred the newspapers to call her Mlle de
Forcheville. It is true that for those writings over which she did have
some control, that is, her letters, she negotiated the transition for a
while by signing G. S. Forcheville. The veritable hypocrisy of this
signature was revealed far less by the suppression of the other letters
of Swann’s name than by those of Gilberte’s name. Indeed, by reducing
her innocent first name to a simple G., Mlle de Forcheville seemed to
insinuate to her friends that the same amputation applied to the name of
Swann was itself due only to the same desire for brevity. She even
bestowed a particular importance on the S, giving it a kind of long tail
that cut across the G, but one felt this to be as provisional and doomed
to disappear as the one which, despite its length in the monkey, is
absent in man.

Despite this, her snobbery retained an element of Swann’s intellectual
curiosity. I remember that on the same afternoon she asked Mme de
Guermantes if she might not have known M. du Lau, and when the Duchesse
replied that he was unwell and unable to go out, Gilberte asked what he
was like, for, she added, blushing slightly, she had heard so much about
him. (The Marquis du Lau had in fact been one of Swann’s closest friends
before the latter’s marriage and perhaps even Gilberte herself might
have caught a glimpse of him, but at a time when she was not interested
in those social circles.) ‘Might M. de Bréauté or the Prince d’Agrigente
give me an idea?’ she asked. ‘Oh not at all!’ cried Mme de Guermantes,
who had a fine sense of these provincial distinctions and was able to
offer a sober portrait, albeit coloured with the hoarse, gilded timbre
of her voice and bathed in the warm light of her violet eyes. ‘No, not
at all. Du Lau was a charming nobleman from the Périgord, with all the
refinements but casual manners of the provinces. At Guermantes, when the
King of England, who was a good friend of du Lau, was there, they had
tea after the hunt; this was the time of day when du Lau used to take
off his boots. Well, the presence of King Edward⁹ and all the grand
dukes failed to impress him at all, he came back downstairs into the
great salon of the Guermantes, wearing his thick woollen slippers. He
felt that he was the Marquis du Lau d’Allemans who had no reason to feel
inhibited by the King of England. It was he and the charming Quasimodo
de Breteuil that I liked most of all. Besides, they were great friends
of …’ (she was about to say ‘your father’ and stopped short). ‘No, that
has no connection with Gri-Gri or Bréauté. He is an authentic Périgord
nobleman. By the way, Mémé quotes a page from Saint-Simon about a
Marquis d’Allemans, that’s absolutely him.’ I quoted the first words of
the portrait: ‘M. d’Allemans, who was one of the most distinguished
members of the Périgord nobility, through his noble descent and through
his own merit, was treated by everyone who lived there as judge and jury
to whom everyone tended to appeal because of his honesty, his competence
and his politeness, as well as being the cock of the walk in his
province. – Yes, that sounds just like him,’ said Mme de Guermantes,
‘especially as he was always as red as a coxcomb. – Yes, I remember
having heard that description,’ said Gilberte, without adding that she
had heard it from her father, who was in fact a great admirer of
Saint-Simon.

She also liked talking about the Prince d’Agrigente and M de Bréauté for
another reason. The Prince d’Agrigente was of the house of Aragon by
descent but their estate is held in the Poitou. As for his château, at
least the one where he resided, it was not one of his family’s châteaux
but came from the family of his mother’s former husband and was situated
at roughly equal distance from Martinville and Guermantes. So Gilberte
spoke of him and M. de Bréauté as country neighbours who reminded her of
her former province. Objectively speaking, there was an element of
deceit in these words, since it was only in Paris that she had come to
know M. de Bréauté, through the Comtesse Molé, who was, it should be
said, an old friend of her father. As for the pleasure of speaking of
the countryside near Tansonville, it may have been sincere. Snobbery for
some people is analogous to those sweet-tasting cordials which we lace
with more active ingredients. Gilberte took an interest in some elegant
lady because she owned some superb books and some Nattiers,¹⁰ which my
former friend would certainly not have gone to see at the Bibliothèque
Nationale or the Louvre, and I imagine that the attractions of
Tansonville for Gilberte would have exerted their influence less through
Mme Sazerat or Mme Goupil, despite their even greater proximity, than
through M. d’Agrigente. ‘Oh poor Babal and Gri-Gri,’ said Mme de
Guermantes, ‘they are far more ill than du Lau, I’m afraid they won’t
last long, either of them.’

When M. de Guermantes had finished reading my article he addressed me
some rather muted compliments. He regretted the somewhat hackneyed form
of my style, which was ‘as inflated and metaphorical as Chateaubriand’s
outmoded prose’; on the other hand he congratulated me wholeheartedly
for having found an ‘occupation’: ‘I like people to do something with
their fingers and thumbs. I don’t like layabouts who always take
themselves too seriously or get over-excited. Foolish breed!’ Gilberte,
who had lost no time in adopting society manners, declared how proud she
was to be able to say that she was the friend of an author. ‘Just
imagine how I shall tell everyone that I have the pleasure and the
_honour_ of knowing you.’ ‘Wouldn’t you like to accompany us tomorrow to
the Opéra Comique?’ the Duchesse asked me, and I thought that this must
be an invitation to the very bar where I had seen her for the first time
and which had then seemed as inaccessible to me as the underwater realm
of the Nereids.¹¹ But I replied sadly: ‘No, I cannot go to the theatre,
I have lost a friend. She was very dear to me.’ The tears nearly came to
my eyes as I said it and yet for the first time I felt something akin to
pleasure in talking about it. It was from that moment that I started to
write to everyone to tell them of my great sorrow and to cease to feel
it.

When Gilberte had left, Mme de Guermantes said to me: ‘You didn’t
understand my signals, it was to stop you talking about Swann.’ And as I
excused myself, she said to her husband: ‘But I understand very well; I
nearly mentioned him myself, I only just had time to cover up, it was
awful, luckily I stopped in time. You know how embarrassing it is,’ in
order to diminish my fault a little by pretending to believe that I had
complied with a propensity which was common to all and which was
difficult to resist. ‘What am I supposed to do about it?’ replied the
Duc. ‘All you have to do is have the drawings taken back upstairs again,
since they make you think of Swann. If you don’t think about Swann, you
won’t talk about him.’

The following day I received two letters of congratulation which
astonished me considerably, one from Mme Goupil, a lady from Combray
whom I had not seen for many years and to whom even in Combray I had
hardly spoken more than two or three times. She had had a copy of the
_Figaro_ sent by a lending library. Thus when something of any note
happens to us in life, we hear the news from people situated so far from
our present acquaintances and so far back in our memory that they seem
to be situated at a great distance, especially in terms of depth. A
forgotten school-friend, who might have remembered himself to you on a
dozen occasions, shows up but this does turn out to have its
compensations. Thus it was that Bloch, whose opinion on my article I
would have so liked to know, did not write to me. It is true that he had
read the article and was to admit this to me later but only in a delayed
reaction. The fact is that a few years later he himself wrote an article
for the _Figaro_ and wanted to inform me of the event immediately. As he
too had benefited from what seemed to him to be a privilege, his need to
pretend to be ignorant of my article having suddenly ceased, as if a
compress had been released, he mentioned it to me, very differently from
the way in which he wanted me to talk about his own: ‘I heard that you
too had an article published,’ he said. ‘But I didn’t think I should
mention it to you, for fear of displeasing you, for one should not speak
to one’s friends of the humiliating things that happen to them. And
obviously it is humiliating to write for the newspaper of the sword and
the cross, of “five o’clock” tea parties, and other kinds of holy
water.’ His character had not changed, but his language had become less
precious, as happens to certain writers who drop their mannerist style
when they stop writing symbolist poems and start producing serialized
novels.

In order to console myself for Bloch’s silence, I reread Mme Goupil’s
letter; but it lacked warmth, for if the aristocracy has certain
formulae which erect fences, between the opening ‘Dear Sir’ and the
closing ‘Yours faithfully’ exclamations of joy and admiration can spring
up like flowers and let their sweet-scented sprays spill over the
boundary fence. But bourgeois conventions enclose even the heart of the
letter itself within a network of ‘your legitimate success’ or at best
‘your fine success’. Sisters-in-law, mindful of their upbringing and
restrained by the stays of decency, believe that they have overstepped
the bounds of pathos or enthusiasm, if they have written ‘with kind
regards’. ‘Mother joins me in sending her best wishes’ is a superlative
which is rarely lavished. I received another letter apart from Mme
Goupil’s, but I did not recognize the name, Sautton. The writing was
simple, the tone charming. I was very disappointed not be be able to
discover who had written it.

Two days later I was delighted to think that Bergotte must have greatly
admired my article, which he could not have read without jealousy. Yet
after a while my joy subsided. In fact Bergotte had not written me a
word. I had simply wondered whether he would have liked the article,
fearing that he had not. The question that I had asked myself was
answered by Mme de Forcheville, who had replied that he admired it
greatly, finding it worthy of a great writer. But she told me this while
I was asleep: it was a dream. Almost all our dreams answer the questions
that we have asked ourselves with complex affirmations and scenarios
involving several characters, but they fade with the dawn.

As for Mlle de Forcheville, I could not help feeling sorrowful when I
thought of her. For all that she was Swann’s daughter, whom he would
have so loved to see at the Guermantes’, they had refused to invite her,
despite their great friendship for him, but then they had spontaneously
sought her company after the passing of time, which, depending on what
others have told you about them, renews the personality of those people
whom we have not seen for a long time or invests them with another,
since we too have shed our skins and acquired new tastes. But when on
occasion Swann, holding his daughter in his arms and embracing her,
said, ‘It’s nice, my love, to have a daughter like you; one day when I’m
no longer here, if people still speak of your poor Papa, it will be to
you alone and only because of you,’ Swann, thus placing his timid and
anxious hopes of survival after his death in his daughter, was as
mistaken as some ageing banker who, having made his will in favour of a
very respectful little dancer who is kept by him, thinks that, although
he is no more than an old friend to her, she will remain faithful to his
memory. She was very respectful but under the table she played footsy
with those of the old banker’s male friends whom she fancied, albeit
with total discretion, preserving excellent appearances. She will wear
mourning for the distinguished gentleman, will be greatly relieved, will
benefit not only from the ready cash but from the properties and
motor-cars that he has left her, but will everywhere erase the hallmarks
of their previous owner, which cause her mild embarrassment, and she
will never add to her enjoyment of the gift any regret for its donor.
The illusions of paternal love are perhaps no less than those of the
other kind; many daughters consider their father no more than the old
man who will leave them his fortune. Gilberte’s presence in a
drawing-room, instead of being an occasion for people still to speak
sometimes of her father, was an obstacle preventing them from seizing
those increasingly rare occasions when they might still have been able
to do so. Even on the subject of the words he had spoken and the gifts
he had offered, people acquired the habit of no longer mentioning his
name, and she who should have renewed, if not perpetuated, his memory
turned out to be precisely the one who hastened and consummated the
process of dying and forgetting.

And it was not only where Swann was concerned that Gilberte gradually
consummated the process of forgetting: she had hastened this process
within me in relation to Albertine. Under the impact of the desire, and
consequently the desire for happiness, which Gilberte had aroused within
me during those few hours when I had believed her to be somebody else, a
certain number of painful sufferings and preoccupations, which until so
recently had continued to obsess my thoughts, fell away from me,
dragging away with them a whole block of memories, probably long since
crumbling and precarious, connected with Albertine. For if many of the
memories which were linked to her had at first helped to maintain within
me a regret for her death, the regret itself had, in its turn, fixed the
memories. So that the change in my emotional state, doubtless prepared
obscurely day by day through the continual erosion caused by forgetting,
but suddenly realized as a whole, gave me that impression of the void
which I remember having experienced that day for the first time, that
suppression within me of a whole section of the association of my ideas,
as in a man whose worn-out cerebral artery ruptures and who finds a
whole part of his memory erased or paralysed. I no longer loved
Albertine. At most there were occasional days which brought the kind of
weather that, modifying and stimulating our sensitivity, restores our
contact with reality, making me feel bitterly sad when I thought of her.
I suffered from a love that no longer existed. Thus when the weather
changes do amputees feel pain in the leg they have lost.

The disappearance of my suffering and of everything that accompanied it
left me diminished, as often does the cure of an illness which took up a
great place in our lives. No doubt it is because memories do not remain
true for ever, and because life is made up of the endless renewal of
cells, that love is not eternal. But this renewal of memories is none
the less delayed by our attention, which stops and fixes for a moment
what is bound to change. And since sorrow, like desire for a woman, is
magnified when we think of it, if we had more things to keep us busy,
this would render forgetting, as it does chastity, all the easier.

While it remains the case that it is time which progressively causes
forgetting, it is forgetting in its turn which, through a different
reaction (although for me it was a distraction – the desire for Mlle
d’Éporcheville – which suddenly rendered forgetting effective and
palpable), contributes to profoundly disturbing our notion of time.
There are optical illusions in time as well as space. The persistence
within me of traces of my old urge to work, to make up for lost time, to
change my way of life, or rather to start to live, gave me the illusion
that I was still as young as ever; yet the memory of all the events
which had succeeded one another during my life – and also those which
had succeeded in my heart, for, when we have changed a great deal, we
are led to suppose that we have lived for longer – during those last
months of Albertine’s existence, had made them seem to last much longer
than a year, and this forgetting of so many things, separating me by
empty spaces from quite recent events, which they made seem long gone
because I had had what we call the ‘time’ to forget them, with its
fragmented and irregular interpolation in the midst of my memory – like
a thick ocean mist which blots out all the objects that aid navigation –
was what had upset and dislocated my sense of temporal distances,
shrinking them here, stretching them there, and making me believe that I
was sometimes much further from, sometimes much nearer to things than I
really was. And since in the new, as yet undiscovered, spaces which lay
before me, there would no more be traces of my love for Albertine than
there had been in my recent experience of traversing periods of loss of
love for my grandmother, offering a succession of periods during which,
after a certain interval, nothing that had sustained the preceding
period remained in the following one, my life appeared to me to be
something as much lacking the support of an individual, identical and
permanent self, something as useless in the future as protracted in the
past, something as easy for death to terminate here or there without any
kind of conclusion, as those school courses in French History which stop
arbitrarily, depending on the whim of the syllabus or the teacher, at
the 1830 or the 1848 Revolution or the end of the Second Empire.¹²

Perhaps then the fatigue and sadness that I felt came less from having
loved in vain than from the fact that I was already forgetting, that I
was starting to take pleasure in the company of new, living people,
simple society acquaintances, mere friends of the Guermantes, almost
entirely uninteresting in their own right. I consoled myself perhaps
more easily for the fact that the girl I had loved was after a certain
lapse of time no more than a faded memory than for the fact that I found
myself once more pervaded by that vain activity which makes us waste
time in brightening our lives with a lively but parasitical human flora,
which will also return to the void when it dies, which is already alien
to everything that we have experienced, but towards which in our
melancholia we none the less direct all our reserves of verbiage and
flattery, in a senile attempt at seduction. The new person who would be
quite able to live without Albertine had appeared within me, since I had
managed to mention her to Mme de Guermantes as if I were afflicted, but
without actually suffering much. The possible arrival of these new
selves, which should bear a name different from that of their
predecessor because of their indifference to what I loved, had always
terrified me: on a former occasion in the case of Gilberte, when her
father told me that if I went to live in the South Seas I would never
want to return, and on a more recent occasion when I had read with such
a heavy heart the memoirs of a mediocre writer who, separated by life
from a woman whom he had adored when he was young, met her again as an
old man, but felt neither pleasure nor any desire to see her again. Yet,
on the other hand, this much-feared but beneficial person brought me, at
the same time as forgetfulness, an almost complete suppression of
suffering and the prospect of recovery, for he was none other than one
of those alternative selves which fate holds in reserve for us, and
which in spite of ourselves – paying no more attention to our prayers
than a clear-sighted and all the more authoritarian doctor – it
substitutes for our sorely wounded self, in a carefully timed operation.
Moreover, it effects this renewal as the need arises, as happens with
the wear and repair of bodily cells, but we take no notice unless our
old self was nursing some great wound, some painful foreign body, which
we are astonished no longer to find, in our marvelling at having become
someone else, someone else for whom his predecessor’s suffering is no
more than the suffering of a third party, a suffering which we can
discuss compassionately because we do not feel it. And we are even quite
unmoved at having passed through so much suffering, for we remember only
vaguely having suffered. In the same way it may happen that we are
terrified by a nightmare. But when we awake we are another person, who
little cares that the person he replaces had to flee from murderers in
his sleep.

Doubtless this self still kept in touch with the old one, as someone
unmoved by the bereavement of a friend nevertheless speaks to his guests
with suitable sadness and returns from time to time to the room where
his friend, the widower, who has asked him to greet the mourners on his
behalf, continues to sob out loud. I was still sobbing when I became
once more, if only for a moment, the person who used to be Albertine’s
friend. But I was tending to move into an entirely new character. It is
not because others have died that our affection for them weakens, it is
because we ourselves are dying. Albertine had no reason to reproach her
friend. He who usurped that name had merely inherited it. We can be
faithful only to what we remember, we can remember only what we have
known. My new self, while growing in the shadow of the old one, had
often heard him speak; through him, through the stories he told of
Albertine; he thought he knew her, he sympathized with her, he liked
her: but his affection was only second-hand.

Another person in whom the process of forgetting where Albertine was
concerned probably evolved more rapidly at this time, and whose reaction
allowed me to realize a little later how far this process had advanced
within me (I now remember this as a second stage, before my final
forgetting), was Andrée. Indeed I can hardly deny that forgetting
Albertine was, if not the single or even the principal cause, at least
the sufficient and necessary cause, of a conversation which Andrée held
with me about six months after the one I have already recorded and where
her words were so different from what she had told me that first time. I
remember that it took place in my room because this was the period when
I enjoyed a semi-carnal relationship with her, on account of the
collective aspect that my love for the girls of the little gang had at
first assumed, and had now resumed, long undifferentiated amongst them,
and only briefly associated exclusively with the person of Albertine
during the last months that had preceded and followed her death.

We were in my room for another reason again which allows me to place
this conversation quite precisely. This is because I was banned from the
rest of the apartment since it was Mama’s at-home day. It was a day when
Mama had gone to take luncheon with Mme Sazerat. As it was my mother’s
open day, she had hesitated before accepting Mme Sazerat’s invitation.
But since, as they do in Combray, Mme Sazerat always managed to invite
you in company with boring people, Mama was sure not to enjoy herself
and guessed that she would not miss out on any pleasures by leaving
early. And in fact she had returned on time and with no regrets, since
Mme Sazerat had invited nobody who was not deadly dull even before being
frozen numb by her special society voice, which Mama called her
Wednesday voice. Otherwise my mother liked her well enough and felt
sorry for her lack of wealth – as a result of her father’s ruinous
cavortings with the Duchesse de *** – a lack of wealth which compelled
her to live almost the whole year round in Combray, apart from a few
weeks with a female relative in Paris and a long ‘leisure excursion’
once every ten years. I remember that my mother, after I had entreated
her repeatedly for months, and because the Princess kept on requesting
her to call, had gone the day before to call on the Princess of Parma,
who never made visits herself and at whose house one usually simply left
one’s card but who had insisted that my mother should pay her a visit,
since protocol forbade her to visit us. My mother returned very
discontented: ‘You made me put my foot in it,’ she said, ‘the Princess
of Parma hardly said good morning to me, she turned away to continue
talking to the ladies with whom she had been conversing, taking no
notice of me, and ten minutes later, since she hadn’t spoken a word to
me, I left, and she didn’t even shake my hand. I was very embarrassed;
and yet when I left her house I met the Duchesse de Guermantes, who was
very pleasant and who talked of you a lot. What a strange idea you had
in telling her about Albertine! She told me that you said that her death
had caused you such sorrow.’ (I had indeed said so to the Duchesse, but
had not given it much emphasis and had forgotten it myself. Yet the most
absent-minded people often pay singular attention to words that we let
slip, which seem quite natural to us but which excite their curiosity.)
‘I shall never return to see the Princess of Parma. You made me put my
foot in it.’

Now the following day, my mother’s at-home day, Andrée came to see me.
She did not have much time, for she had to go and fetch Gisèle, with
whom she wanted to go out to dinner. ‘I know her faults, but she’s still
my best friend and the person for whom I feel the most affection,’ she
said. And she even seemed rather terrified that I might ask to come out
to dinner with them. She had a thirst for people, so that a third party
who knew her too well, as I did, by preventing her from letting herself
go, would prevent her from fully enjoying their company.

It is true that when she arrived I had not appeared; she waited for me
to come, and I was on my way through my little sitting-room to go to
meet her when I realized, from hearing a voice, that I had another
visitor. I was in a hurry to see Andrée, who was waiting in my room, and
since I did not know who the other person was, and he obviously did not
know Andrée, since he had been asked to wait in a different room, I
listened for a moment at the sitting-room door; for my visitor was
speaking, he was not alone; he was talking to a woman: ‘_Oh! ma chérie,
c’est dans mon cœur!_’,¹³ he crooned, quoting the lines written by
Armand Sylvestre. ‘Yes, you will always be my darling, whatever you have
done to me’:

‘Les morts dorment en paix dans le sein de la terre.

Ainsi doivent dormir nos sentiments éteints.

Ces reliques du cœur ont aussi leur poussière;

Sur leurs restes sacrés ne portons pas les mains.¹⁴

‘It’s rather old-fashioned, but isn’t it lovely! And also what I could
have said to you on the very first day:

‘Tu les feras pleurer, enfant belle et chérie …

‘Goodness, don’t you know that?

‘… Tous ces bambins, hommes futurs,

Qui suspendent déjà leur jeune rêverie

Aux cils câlins de tes yeux purs.¹⁵

‘Oh, I almost thought for a moment that I could say:

‘Le premier soir qu’il vint ici

De fierté je n’eus plus souci.

Je lui disais: “Tu m’aimeras

Aussi longtemps que tu pourras.”

Je ne dormais bien qu’en ses bras.’¹⁶

Even if it meant delaying my urgent visit to Andrée for a moment, I was
curious to know to which woman this deluge of poems was addressed. I
opened the door. They were being recited by M. de Charlus to a soldier
whom I soon recognized as Morel and who was about to leave for his
thirteen days’ training in the reserves. He was no longer on intimate
terms with M. de Charlus but saw him from time to time to ask him a
favour. M. de Charlus, who usually expressed his love in more virile
terms, also had his sentimental moods. Moreover in his youth, in order
to understand and feel poetic language, he had been obliged to imagine
it addressed not to a beautiful and wayward lady but to a young man. I
left them as swiftly as I could, although I felt that to call on friends
with Morel gave M. de Charlus great satisfaction, giving him the
momentary illusion of being married again. And what is more he combined
within himself the snobbery of royalty with that of a domestic servant.

The memory of Albertine had become so fragmented within me that it no
longer caused me sadness and was no more than a transition towards new
desires, like a chord that announces a change of key. And even while
discounting any idea of indulging fleeting sexual fancies, since I still
remained faithful to the memory of Albertine, I was happier to have
Andrée by my side than I would have been to have Albertine miraculously
restored. For Andrée would be able to tell me more about Albertine than
Albertine herself had ever told me. Now my problems concerning Albertine
were still present in my mind, although my affections for her, whether
physical or emotional, had already vanished. But my desire to know her
life, which had diminished less, was now comparatively greater than my
need for her presence. Besides, the idea that a woman might have had a
relationship with her only provoked in me the desire to have this woman
too. I told Andrée this while I caressed her. Then without making the
slightest effort to reconcile her words with those which she had uttered
a few months previously, Andrée told me with a half-smile: ‘Oh, yes, but
you are a man. So we can’t do quite the same things together that I used
to do with Albertine.’ And whether she thought she would increase my
desire (hoping to tempt her into confidential revelations, I had told
her previously that I would like to have relations with a woman who had
had them with Albertine) or my sorrow, or perhaps destroy a feeling of
superiority over her that she might think I felt from having been the
only person to have had a relationship with Albertine, she added: ‘Oh we
both had some good times together, she was so tender, so passionate.
Besides, I wasn’t the only one that she liked to take her pleasure with.
She had met a handsome lad at Mme Verdurin’s called Morel. They
understood each other immediately. He took it upon himself – with her
permission to take his own pleasure too, for he liked inexperienced
young things and, as soon as he had set them off down the slippery
slope, would cast them loose – he took it upon himself to lure young
laundry-maids and young fisher-girls from farther along the coast, who
could fall in love with a boy but would not have responded to the
advances of a girl. As soon as the girl was well and truly under his
thumb, he took her to a secluded spot and gave her over to Albertine.
Fearing that they might lose Morel, who of course joined in the act, the
girls always did what they were told but they lost him all the same,
for, from fear of the consequences and also because once or twice was
enough for him, he would disappear leaving a false address. He was once
bold enough to take one of these girls along with Albertine to a house
of ill-fame in Couliville, where four or five women took her together or
in succession. But afterwards Albertine felt terrible remorse. I think
that with you she had overcome her passions and kept postponing the day
when she would yield again. And then her friendship with you was so
great that her conscience was pricked. But it was inevitable that if
ever she left you she would start again. She hoped that you would save
her, that you would marry her. Deep down, she felt that it was a kind of
criminal folly, and I often wondered if it wasn’t after some such
affair, causing some family suicide, that she killed herself. I have to
admit that right at the beginning of her stay with you, she had not
entirely renounced her games with me. There were days when she seemed to
need them, so much so that once, when it would have been so easy
elsewhere, she could not bring herself to say good-bye to me before she
had taken me to lie down beside her, in your home. Our luck was running
out, we nearly got caught. She made the most of the fact that Françoise
had gone out on an errand and that you had not yet come home. Then she
put out all the lights so that after you had turned the key in the lock
you would waste some time searching for the switch, but she had not
locked the door to her bedroom. We heard you coming up the stairs, I
only just had time to adjust my dress and go downstairs. It was a waste
of time, because by an incredible coincidence you had forgotten your key
and had to ring. But we had none the less lost our heads so much that,
without having time to confer, we both suddenly thought of the same way
to hide our embarrassment, by pretending to detest the scent of syringa
whereas on the contrary we both adored it. You had brought back with you
a long branch of that shrub, which allowed me to turn my head away and
hide my confusion. That did not prevent me from making the absurdly
clumsy suggestion that Françoise had probably returned and could perhaps
open the door for you, although only a second earlier I had lied to you,
saying that we had just returned from an excursion and that on our
arrival Françoise had not yet left (which was true). But our misfortune
– thinking that you had your key – was to have put out the lights, for
we were afraid that on your way up you would see them come back on; or
at least we hesitated too long. And for three nights Albertine did not
sleep a wink because she was constantly afraid that you would be
suspicious and would ask Françoise why she had not lit the lamps before
she left. For Albertine was very afraid of you, and sometimes was sure
that you were deceitful and wicked and basically hated her. After three
days she gathered, given your calmness, that you hadn’t even thought of
asking Françoise at all and she managed to sleep quietly once more, but
she never took up her relationship with me again, whether from fear or
remorse, for she claimed that she was very much in love with you, or
perhaps she was in love with someone else. At all events, after that it
was impossible to mention syringa in her presence without her turning
bright red and hiding her face in her hands to try to cover her
blushes.’

Like certain moments of good fortune, there are moments of misfortune
which come too late, they fail to take on within us the significance
that they would have assumed earlier. Andrée’s terrible revelation was
that kind of misfortune for me. Doubtless, even when a piece of bad news
should make us sad, it may happen that some distraction or the intricate
interplay of conversation makes it pass by unheeded, so that, having a
thousand things to try to respond to, transformed into another person by
the desire to please the present company and protected for a few
moments, as we enter this new cycle, from the emotions and the suffering
which we discarded on entry and which we will regain when the short
period of enchantment is over, we have no time to take it in. Yet if
these emotions and suffering are too predominant, we enter only
half-heartedly into the ambit of a new and ephemeral world in which, too
tied to our suffering, we are unable to become another; then the words
strike home to our heart, which we have been unable to disengage. But
for some time now, words relating to Albertine, like a poison which has
evaporated, no longer retained their toxic powers. The distance was
already too great; as a man out walking during the afternoon who sees a
faint crescent in the sky and thinks ‘Is that all there is to the great
globe of the moon?’, I thought: ‘Goodness! That truth which I have
sought and feared so much, is it only a few words spoken during a
conversation and which one cannot fully take in because one is not
alone!’ Then again, the truth caught me totally unprepared, for Andrée
had really exhausted me. Truly I would have preferred to have had more
strength to devote to such a revelation; it remained external, for I had
not yet found a place for it in my heart. We expect the truth to be
revealed to us through new signs, not through a mere sentence,
especially one so similar to those phrases that we have so often
rehearsed in our minds. The habit of thinking sometimes prevents us from
experiencing reality, inoculates us against it and makes it seem no more
than yet another thought. There is no idea that does not carry within it
its own possible refutation, no word that does not negate the word that
negates it.

At all events, this was the sort of useless truth about the life of a
dead mistress, if indeed it was true, which suddenly surfaces from the
depths just when we no longer have any use for it. Then (doubtless
thinking of another woman whom we love now and with whom the same
process might occur, for we are no longer interested in the person we
have forgotten) we are upset. We think, ‘If only she were still alive,’
we think, ‘If only the woman who is alive understood all this and could
realize that when she dies I shall discover everything she is hiding
from me!’ But it is a vicious circle. If I had been able to bring
Albertine back to life, by the same token I would not have been able to
make Andrée reveal anything. It is somewhat akin to the eternal ‘You’ll
see, when I no longer love you’, which is so true and yet so absurd,
since we might find out much more if we were no longer in love, but then
we would no longer be interested in learning it. In fact, the case is
exactly the same. For the woman whom one sees when one no longer loves
her, if she tells you everything, it is in fact because she is no longer
the same person or because you are no longer the same self: the person
who was in love no longer exists. There too death has intervened, has
made everything easy and pointless. Such were my reflections, as I
adopted the hypothesis that Andrée was telling the truth – which was
possible – and inclined to be sincere with me precisely because she now
had a relationship with me, showing the same Saint-André-des-Champs
qualities as Albertine originally had done with me. She was helped in
this matter by the fact that she no longer feared Albertine, for our
grasp of people’s reality does not long survive their death and after a
few years they are like those gods of discredited religions that one may
happily offend because one no longer believes in their existence. But
the fact that Andrée no longer believed in the existence of Albertine
might result in her feeling fewer moral scruples, not merely over
betraying a truth which she had promised not to reveal, but even over
devising a lie which retrospectively slandered her alleged accomplice.
Was it this lack of fear which enabled her to reveal at last what I took
to be the truth or, alternatively, to fabricate a lie, if, for whatever
reason, she found me too full of happiness and pride and wanted to
deflate them? Perhaps she was annoyed with me (with an annoyance that
had been held in abeyance as long as she had seen me miserable and
disconsolate) because I had had a relationship with Albertine and
because perhaps she envied me – thinking that for this reason I felt
myself more favoured than she – an advantage that she had perhaps
neither obtained nor even sought. Thus it was that I had often heard her
tell people that they looked very ill, when it was their healthy
complexion and above all their awareness of their healthy complexion
that exasperated her, so that, hoping to annoy them, she would tell them
that she herself was very well and continued to declare this even when
she was quite ill, until the day when the approach of death finally
loosened her interest in whether the happy were well or whether they
knew that she was dying. But, at the time, this day was still a long way
off. Perhaps I had irritated her for some reason unknown to me, as once
she had been furious with the young man who was so well-informed about
sport but so ignorant about everything else, the man whom we had met at
Balbec and who since then had been living with Rachel, and about whom
Andrée still spread libellous rumours, hoping to be sued for libel in
order to be able to publish dishonourable facts about his father, the
falsehood of which he would have been unable to prove. Now perhaps this
fury against me, which had abated as soon as she saw how sad I was, was
only a relapse. Indeed, even those people whom, her eyes sparkling with
rage, she had threatened with disgrace, death and imprisonment, using
false witness if need be, as soon as she thought they were unhappy and
humiliated, she wished them no ill and was ready to shower them with
favours. For she was not basically wicked and if, below the surface, her
slightly deeper, rather surprising nature did not confirm the kindness
that her first delicate attentions had led people to suppose but rather
envy and pride, yet, at an even deeper level, her third-degree, that is,
her true nature, even if never quite fully realized, tended towards
goodness and love of her neighbour. Only, like all people who live in a
state which they wish were better, but know no more of this than their
desire for it and do not understand that the first condition is to break
with their present state – like neurasthenics or morphine addicts who
would like to be cured but only as long as no one deprives them of their
tics or their morphine, like certain rather worldly religious souls or
artistic minds, aspiring to solitude yet prepared to imagine it only in
so far as it does not imply absolutely renouncing their former life –
Andrée was ready to love all God’s creatures but only as long as she had
first managed to see them failing to triumph and, in order to do so, had
humiliated them in advance. She did not understand that one should love
even the proud and conquer their pride through love rather than more
overweening pride. But the fact is that she was like those invalids who
want to be cured by the same much-loved means as sustain their illness
and which they would immediately cease to love if they abandoned these
means. But one may learn to swim and still prefer to keep one’s feet
dry.

As regards the athletic young man, who was a nephew of the Verdurins and
whom I had met during my two stays in Balbec, I have to say in passing,
and by way of anticipation, that a short while after Andrée’s visit, the
account of which I shall resume in a moment, there occurred certain
events which created a great impression on me. First of all, this young
man (perhaps in memory of Albertine, although I did not know at the time
that he had been in love with her) became engaged to Andrée and married
her, despite Rachel’s despair, which left him totally unmoved. At that
time (that is to say a few months after the visit which I have
mentioned) Andrée no longer said that he was a ne’er-do-well, and it was
only later that I realized that she had said so purely because she was
crazy about him but thought that he was not interested in her. But
another fact was even more striking. This young man produced a series of
short sketches, using stage-sets and costumes that he had designed
himself and which introduced into contemporary art a revolution at least
equal to that accomplished by the Ballets Russes.¹⁷ In short, those in
the know considered his works to be of crucial importance, almost works
of genius, and I must say that I share their opinion, thus ratifying to
my astonishment Rachel’s earlier views. People who had seen him at
Balbec attending only to whether the clothes of the people he had to
frequent were well cut or not and spending all his time at baccarat or
the races or playing golf or polo, who knew that he had always been the
dunce of the class and had even got himself expelled from school (to
annoy his parents, he had spent two months living in the notorious house
of ill-fame where M. de Charlus believed he had seen Morel), thought
that his works had perhaps been composed by Andrée, who, from love for
him, wished him to take the credit, or that more probably he used his
great personal fortune, only slightly reduced by his follies, to pay
some brilliant but needy professional to write them (this kind of
wealthy society – not having the gloss which is acquired by frequenting
the aristocracy and having no idea of what an artist is like, since for
them he is only either an actor whom they invite to recite monologues at
their daughters’ engagement parties, where, as soon as he has finished,
his fee is discreetly handed him in an another room, or perhaps a
painter for whom they will have the daughter pose once she is married,
before she has had children and while she still has her looks – tending
to believe that everyone in society who writes, composes or paints,¹⁸
has his works created for him by someone else and pays to establish his
reputation as an author as others do to have a seat in parliament). But
none of this was true; for this young man was indeed the author of those
admirable works. When I found out, I could not help wavering between
different explanations. Either he had indeed spent long years as the
‘thick-headed brute’ that he had seemed and some physiological cataclysm
had awoken the Genie slumbering within him, like a Sleeping Beauty; or
else during his last turbulent years at school, failing his
baccalaureate, running up large gambling debts at Balbec, avoiding
riding in the ‘tram’ with his aunt Verdurin’s acquaintances because of
their dreadful clothes, there was already a man of genius, perhaps
unaware of his genius, having lost the key to the door in the turmoil of
his juvenile passions; or even, a man of genius and already aware of it,
yet bottom of the class, because while his teacher was mouthing clichés
about Cicero, he himself was reading Rimbaud or Goethe. Certainly
nothing would have justified this hypothesis when I met him in Balbec,
where his preoccupations seemed to me to resolve entirely around the
form of horses and the preparation of cocktails. But this is not an
irrefutable objection. Perhaps he was very vain, which may be allied to
genius, and tried to shine in the way he knew would dazzle the society
he lived in and which he could not achieve by showing a profound
knowledge of _Elective Affinities_,¹⁹ but rather by knowing how to drive
a four-in-hand. Besides I am not sure even that when he had become the
author of these fine and original works, he would have much wanted, in
the theatres where he was known, to greet anyone who was not wearing a
dinner-jacket, since people stay true to their former tastes, yet this
would prove in him not stupidity but vanity and even a certain practical
sense, a certain insight in adapting his vanity to the mentality of
fools whose esteem he needed and for whom the dinner-jacket may well
shine more brightly than the eyes of a thinker. Who knows, if seen from
an external viewpoint, how many a man of talent or even without talent
but with a fondness for things intellectual, like myself for instance,
might not have struck someone meeting him at Rivebelle, at the Hôtel de
Balbec, or on the promenade at Balbec, of the most utter and pretentious
imbecile? Not to mention that for Octave the realm of art must have been
something so intimate, lodged so deeply in his most hidden depths, that
he would doubtless never have thought of talking about it, as would, for
example, Saint-Loup, for whom the arts had the same prestige as teams of
horses for Octave. Then he might have had a passion for gambling, and
people would say that he never lost it. Even so if the piety which
brought to light the unknown works of Vinteuil could emerge from the
very dubious world of Montjouvain, I was no less struck to think that
perhaps the most striking masterpieces of our times have been nurtured
not by taking the _Concours Général_,²⁰ and following the classic
academic route, like the Broglie family,²¹ but by frequenting the
paddock and fashionable cocktail bars. At all events during this period
at Balbec the reasons which made me want to meet him and those which
made Albertine and her friends anxious to prevent me from meeting him,
fell equally wide of the mark, and their only value might have been to
highlight the eternal misunderstanding by the ‘intellectual’
(represented in this case by myself) and society (represented by the
little gang) of the character of a social figure (the young golfer). I
detected no signs of his talent, and his prestige in my eyes – of the
same type as that of Mme Blatin formerly – was to be, whatever they
claimed, a friend of my young female friends, and more closely linked to
their gang than I was. What is more, Albertine and Andrée, symbolizing
thereby the inability of society people to exercise a valid judgment on
things of the mind and their tendency in such matters to believe in
deceptive appearances, were not only not far from finding me stupid
because I was curious to find out about such a fool, but were astonished
above all that, if I had to choose a golfer, I should go for the most
insignificant. If at worst I had wanted to take up with the young
Gilbert de Bellœuvre, he was at least a lad who had conversational as
well as golfing talents, who had been runner-up in the _Concours
Général_ and wrote pleasant verses (and yet who was in fact as thick as
they come). Or else, if my aim was to ‘make a study’, ‘for a book’, Guy
Saumoy, who was completely mad and who had twice abducted a minor, was
at least a curious figure who could ‘interest’ me. I would have been
‘allowed’ these two but whatever did I see in the other one? He was
clearly a major specimen of the species known as the ‘thick-headed
brute’.

To return to Andrée’s visit, after what she had just revealed to me
about her relationship with Albertine, she added that Albertine’s main
reason for leaving me was what the girls of the little gang, and others,
might have thought if they saw her living with a young man to whom she
was not married: ‘I know it was at your mother’s house. But that makes
no difference. You can’t imagine what it’s like, this society of young
women, what they hide from each other, how afraid they are of other
people’s opinions. I have seen some who were terribly strict with their
young men, simply because they knew their girl-friends and they were
afraid that certain things might be repeated, and yet I have by chance
seen the very same girls, much to their annoyance, on occasions when
they were behaving very diferently.’ A few months earlier Andrée’s
apparent knowledge of the motives that drove the girls of the little
gang would have seemed priceless to me. Perhaps what she said was
sufficient to explain the fact that Albertine, who was to yield to me
later in Paris, had rejected me in Balbec, where I was constantly in
touch with her friends, something which I had absurdly seen as a great
advantage allowing me to be on better terms with her. Perhaps it was
even the sight of some sign of my confiding in Andrée or the fact that I
had rashly told Andrée that Albertine was coming round to sleep at the
Grand Hotel which caused the latter, who an hour earlier might have been
ready to grant me certain pleasures as the most natural thing in the
world, to change her mind and threaten to ring for help. But in this
case, she must have been more complaisant with many others. This idea
revived my jealousy and I told Andrée that there was one thing I wanted
to ask her. ‘Did you do that in your grandmother’s empty apartment? –
Oh, no, never, someone might have disturbed us – And yet, I thought, it
seemed to me … – Besides, Albertine used to prefer to do it when we were
in the country – Whereabouts? – At first, when we did not have time to
go very far, we used to go to the Buttes-Chaumont, there was a house she
knew there, or even under the trees, there is never anyone there; or in
the grotto at the Petit Trianon, too. – There you are, how do you expect
me to believe you? You swore to me, less than a year ago, that you had
never done anything at the Buttes-Chaumont. – I was afraid of hurting
you.’ As I have already mentioned, it was only much later that I thought
that it was on the contrary with the second version of her confession
that Andrée had tried to hurt me. And I would have guessed this
immediately, while she was speaking, because I would have felt the need
to do so, if I had still been as much in love with Albertine. But
Andrée’s words did not hurt me enough for me to feel it indispensable to
judge them immediately to be false. In short, if what Andrée said was
true, and at first I did not doubt it, the real Albertine that I now
discovered, after knowing so many and various apparent Albertines, was
not very different from the orgiastic girl that I had sensed when she
had loomed up, walking along the promenade at Balbec, and who had
afterwards offered me so many changing aspects, as when in approaching a
town we see its buildings progressively modify their disposition until
they smother and erase its principal monument, which was the only thing
visible from a distance, but where finally, as we get to know it better
and judge it more accurately, its true proportions turn out to be those
indicated by the perspective of our first appraisal, the remainder of
the buildings which we had passed being no more than the successive
series of lines of defence that any person raises to block our vision
and which must be crossed one after the other, whatever suffering it
might cost, before reaching their heart. Moreover, just as I had not
needed to believe absolutely in Albertine’s innocence because my
suffering had diminished, I should admit that the converse was true,
that if I did not suffer overmuch from this revelation it was because,
for some time past, the belief in Albertine’s innocence that I had
forged had been gradually and unwittingly replaced by a belief that had
always been present within me, the belief in Albertine’s guilt. Now if I
no longer believed in the innocence of Albertine, it was because I no
longer felt the need or the passionate desire to do so. It is desire
that engenders belief, and if we are not usually aware of this, it is
because most of the desires which engender belief – unlike the one which
had made me believe that Albertine was innocent – die only when we do.
Rather than accept all the evidence which corroborated my original
version, I had stupidly preferred to believe Albertine’s bald
affirmations. Why had I believed her? Lying is essential to humanity. It
plays perhaps as great a part as the search for pleasure and is in fact
driven by this search. We lie to protect our pleasure or our honour, if
to divulge this pleasure would be contrary to our honour. We lie all our
lives, above all, or perhaps even only, to those who love us. For in
fact they alone make us fear for our pleasure and desire their esteem.
At first I had thought Albertine guilty and only my desire, enlisting
all the forces of my intelligence in its enterprise of doubt, had led me
astray. Perhaps we live surrounded by electric or seismic signals, which
we have to interpret in good faith in order to know the truth about
people’s characters. But I have to admit that, however sad Andrée’s
words had made me, in spite of everything I found it more satisfying
that reality should at last conform to what my instincts had first
intuitively felt, rather than confirm the wretched and cowardly optimism
to which I had later yielded. I preferred life to live up to my
intuitions; intuitions, moreover, which I had had the first day on the
beach, when I had thought that these girls were the incarnation of vice
and frenzied pleasure, and also on the evening when I had seen
Albertine’s governess take this passionate girl back into the little
villa, as one pushes back into its cage a wild beast that nothing later,
despite appearances, will be able to tame; did they not match what Bloch
had told me when he made the world seem so beautiful, by showing me
something which sent shivers down my spine every time I went out for a
ride, every time I met a woman, that is, the universal nature of desire?
Perhaps in spite of everything it had been for the best that I should
only now encounter these first intuitions a second time, with the
corroborating evidence. As long as my love for Albertine was still
entirely intact, they would have hurt me too much, and it was better
that only a trace of them should remain, my perpetual suspicion of
things which I could not see and which, however, were continually
occurring so close to me, and perhaps yet another, earlier, vaster
trace, which was _my love itself_. For indeed, did not my choosing and
falling in love with Albertine, despite all the denials of my reason,
entail knowing Albertine in all her vileness? And even in the moments
when our mistrust recedes, is love not its prolongation and its
transformation? Is love not a proof of clear-sightedness (a proof
unintelligible to the lover himself) since desire, always seeking what
is most opposite to us, forces us to love what makes us suffer? The
charm of a person, of her eyes, her mouth and her figure, certainly also
contains just those elements which, unbeknown to ourselves, are most
likely to make us unhappy, so that to feel ourselves drawn towards this
person, to start to love her, is, however innocent we claim her to be,
already to start reading between the lines all her misdeeds, all her
betrayals.

And did those charms which, in order to attract me, were thus embodied
in the noxious,²² dangerous, fatal parts of the person, have a causal
relationship with these secret poisons more direct than that which the
luxuriant attractions of some venomous flowers have with their poisonous
secretions? Perhaps, I thought, it was Albertine’s vice itself, the
cause of my later suffering, which had produced in Albertine her frank
and generous manner, creating the illusion that one enjoyed with her the
same loyal and unrestrained camaraderie as with a man, just as a
parallel vice had produced in M. de Charlus a feminine subtlety of wit
and sensibility. In the midst of the most utter blindness, our
perspicacity subsists in the very guise of predilection and tenderness,
so that it is wrong in love to talk of a bad choice, since, as soon as
there is a choice, it can be only a bad one. ‘Did these walks in the
Buttes-Chaumont take place when you came here to call for her?’ I asked
Andrée. ‘Oh, no, from the day when Albertine went home with you from
Balbec, except for what I’ve told you about, she never did anything with
me again. She would not even allow me to mention such things to her any
more. – But my dear Andrée, why keep on lying? Quite by chance, for I
try never to pry, I learned in the minutest detail that Albertine did
that kind of thing, and to be more precise, at the seaside, with a
laundry-maid, only a few days before her death. – Ah, perhaps, after she
had left you, I don’t know. She sensed that she had not been able to win
back your confidence and never would be able to again.’ These last words
overwhelmed me. Then I thought again about the evening with the syringa
and remembered that a fortnight or so later, as my jealousy kept
switching from one object to another, I had asked Albertine if she had
ever had a relationship with Andrée and that she had replied: ‘Oh,
never! Of course I adore Andrée; I feel great affection for her, but as
for a sister, and even if I had the inclinations that you seem to
imagine, she’s the last person that I would think of for that. I can
swear on anything you like, on my aunt, on my poor mother’s grave.’ I
had believed her. And yet even if I had not been put on my guard by the
contradiction between her former partial confessions to things which she
had later denied as soon as she realized that I was not indifferent to
them, I ought to have remembered Swann, convinced that M. de Charlus’s
friendships were platonic and affirming this to me on the evening of the
very day that I had seen the tailor and the Baron in the courtyard; I
ought to have realized that there are two worlds, one overlapping the
other, one constituted by the things that the best and sincerest people
say, and behind it the world composed by the series of these same
people’s actions; so that when a married woman says of a young man, ‘Oh,
it’s perfectly true that I am terribly fond of him, but it’s something
very innocent, very pure, I can swear to you on my parents’ memory,’ we
ought, instead of harbouring any doubts, to swear to ourselves that she
has probably just emerged from the bathroom where she hurriedly retires
after each tryst with the young man, in order to avoid having children.
The spray of syringa made me feel mortally sad and also the fact that
Albertine could have thought, could have told people, that I was
deceitful and hated her; and, more than anything perhaps, her lies,
which were so unexpected that I found it difficult to reconcile them
with my way of thinking. One day she had told me that she had been to an
airfield, where the pilot was a friend of hers (doubtless to divert my
suspicions away from women, thinking that I would be less jealous of
men), that she had been amused to see how entranced Andrée had been by
the pilot and how he had flattered Albertine, so much so that Andrée had
wanted to take a flight in the aeroplane with him. But this had been
entirely invented, Andrée had never been to this airfield, etc.

By the time Andrée had left it was time for dinner. ‘You’ll never guess
who came to visit me for at least three hours,’ said my mother. I say
three hours, it could have been longer, she arrived almost at the same
time as my first guest, who was Mme Cottard, and sat there motionless
while all my callers – more than thirty of them – were coming and going,
and left me only a quarter of an hour ago. If you hadn’t been with your
friend Andrée I would have had someone fetch you. – Well, then, who was
it? – Someone who never pays calls. – The Princess of Parma? – I do
declare that my son is more intelligent than I would have thought. You
spoil the pleasure of making you guess a name, you get it first time. –
Did she apologize for being so cold yesterday? – No, that would have
been stupid. The visit itself was her apology; your poor grandmother
would have really appreciated it. It appears that she asked her footman
at about two o’clock to find out if I had an at-home day. They told her
that today was the day and up she came.’ My first reaction, which I did
not dare reveal to my mother, was that the Princess of Parma, who the
day before had been immersed in the company of some of her closest and
most illustrious lady-friends, those with whom she best loved to
converse, had felt no need to hide the irritation she had felt on seeing
my mother walk in. And this coldness, which moreover all the Guermantes
had generally adopted, was absolutely in the tradition of great German
ladies and they thought to make amends for it with scrupulous
politeness. But my mother thought, and later I came to share her
opinion, that the Princess of Parma had quite simply failed to recognize
her and thought she need take no notice of her, but that after my mother
had left she had learned who she was, whether from the Duchesse de
Guermantes, whom my mother had met downstairs, or from the list of names
which the footmen had requested of the lady visitors at the door before
inscribing them in their register and allowing them to enter. She had
thought it would be impolite to say to my mother or ask someone else to,
‘I did not recognize you,’ but, in a fashion no less suited to the rules
of etiquette of the German principalities and the manners of the
Guermantes than my first version, she had thought that a visit, an
exceptional gesture by her Highness, and especially a visit lasting
several hours, would transmit a similar message to my mother in indirect
but equally expressive terms, which was in fact the result. But I did
not want to waste time asking my mother for an account of the Princess’s
visit, since I had just remembered several queries concerning Albertine
which I had wanted to put to Andrée but had forgotten. How little I
knew, would ever know, may I say, on the subject of Albertine, the only
subject whose details could really have interested me or were at least
starting to interest me again from time to time! For man is a creature
of no fixed age, a creature who has the ability to become years younger
in only a few seconds and who, surrounded by walls formed by the periods
of time that he has lived through, floats around in their midst but as
in a pool whose level keeps constantly changing, thus putting him within
reach now of one time period, now of another. I wrote to Andrée asking
her to come back. She was not free until a week later. Almost as soon as
she had arrived I asked her: ‘Look, since you claim that Albertine no
longer did that kind of thing when she was living here, you must think
that she left me so as to be freer to indulge, but who was the
girl-friend? – No, absolutely not, that was not the reason at all. – So
was it because I was too unpleasant? – No, I don’t think so. I think she
was forced to leave you by her aunt, who had ideas for her with a
“rascal” you know about, that man you called “the Also-ran”, the young
man who loved Albertine and had asked for her hand. Seeing that you were
not going to marry her, they were afraid that her scandalously
protracted stay with you might prevent that young man from marrying her.
Mme Bontemps, who was constantly harried by the young man’s friends and
relations, called Albertine back to her side. Deep down Albertine needed
her uncle and aunt and, when she realized that they were presenting her
with a _fait accompli_, she left you.’ In my jealousy I had never
thought of this explanation but only of Albertine’s desires for women
and of ways of keeping her under surveillance; I had forgotten that Mme
Bontemps also existed and that she might have eventually found strange
something that my mother had found shocking from the outset. At least
Mme Bontemps feared that it might shock the potential fiancé that she
was holding in reserve for her like a pear to slake her thirst, in case
I did not marry her. For Albertine, despite what Andrée’s mother had
previously thought, had in fact found a fine bourgeois match. And on
those occasions when Albertine had wanted to visit Mme Verdurin, had
spoken to her in secret, or had been so annoyed that I had been to one
of Mme Verdurin’s receptions without telling her, the intrigue between
her and Mme Verdurin had been devised in order to allow her to meet, not
Mme Vinteuil, but the nephew who was in love with Albertine and on whose
behalf Mme Verdurin did not aspire to a rich marriage, taking her
satisfaction in working to arrange one of those marriages which are
surprising on the part of certain families if one does not entirely
understand their mentality. Now, I had never given a second thought to
this nephew, who had perhaps been the pioneer thanks to whom I had been
kissed by her on the first occasion. And in place of all the layers of
anxiety about Albertine that I had constructed I had to substitute a
different one or overlay it, since it did not necessarily exclude them,
just as a taste for women does not prevent women from marrying. Was this
marriage the real reason for Albertine’s departure and had she from
self-respect so as not to seem to depend on her aunt or seem to be
forcing me to marry her, preferred not to say so? I started to realize
that the systematic explanation of a single action by multiple causes,
which Albertine skilfully deployed in her relationships with her
girl-friends when she led each of them to believe that it was for her
alone that she had called, was no more than a rather artificial and
self-conscious symbol of the different aspects that any act takes on
according to the point of view from which we consider it. This was
neither the first nor the last time that I felt astonishment and a kind
of shame at never once having thought that Albertine was living with me
in a false situation which could embarrass her aunt. How often has it
happened to me, after trying to understand a relationship between two
people and the problems that it entails, that I have suddenly heard a
third party reveal his own attitude, since he had had even closer links
than I with one of the couple, an attitude which might even have been at
the heart of their problems! And if their actions are always so
indeterminate, how could people themselves not be so? Listening to those
who claimed that Albertine was a schemer who had tried to get herself
married off first to one man then to another, it is not difficult to
suppose how they would have qualified her life with me. And yet in my
opinion she had been a victim, perhaps not an entirely innocent victim,
but in that case guilty for different reasons, in respect of vices which
nobody mentioned.

But the most important thing to admit is this: although, on the one
hand, lying is often a trait of character, it is, on the other hand, in
women who would not otherwise be liars, a natural defence, at first
spontaneous and then gradually more organized, against that sudden
danger which is capable of destroying anyone’s life: love. Then again,
it is not entirely due to chance if intellectual and sensitive men
always offer themselves to insensitive and inferior women and yet still
hold them dear, nor if the proof that they are unloved does not cure
them of being prepared to sacrifice all in order to keep such a creature
by their side. In saying that such men need to suffer, I am telling the
truth, while passing over the preliminary truths which would explain
this – in a sense involuntary – need to suffer as their perfectly
comprehensible consequence. Not to mention the fact that, since entirely
consistent characters are rare, a highly intellectual and sensitive man
will generally have little will-power, will be the plaything of habit
and of that fear of suffering in the immediate future which dooms him to
perpetual suffering and that in these conditions he will never wish to
repudiate the woman who does not love him. We may be astonished that he
is satisfied with so little love, but we should rather imagine the pain
that is caused by the love which he himself feels. A pain which we must
not pity too much, for the terrible turmoil caused by an unhappy love
affair or the departure or death of a lover is like an attack of
paralysis which at first lays us low, but after which the muscles tend
gradually to recover their vital energy and elasticity. And yet this
pain is not without its compensations. These intellectual and sensitive
people are generally little inclined towards lying. Lies catch them all
the more unawares in that, for all their great intelligence, they have
to live in the real world, but rather than reacting vigorously, they
continue to live in thrall to the pain that a woman has just inflicted
on them rather than in the clear awareness of what she wanted, of what
she did, of whom she loved, an awareness mostly the preserve of
strong-willed characters, who require it so that they may face the
future rather than lament the past. So these intellectual and sensitive
people feel betrayed, without quite knowing why. Thus it is that the
mediocre woman, whom we were astonished to see them love, enriches their
universe far more than an intelligent woman would have done. Behind each
of her words they suspect a lie; behind each house she says she has
visited, another house, behind each action and person, another action,
another person. Doubtless they do not know exactly which ones and have
neither the energy nor perhaps even the opportunity to find out. A
deceitful woman can use a very simple trick, without bothering to vary
it, to delude a great number of people and even use it to delude the
same person more than once, when he ought to have been able to see
through it. All of which confronts the sensitive intellectual with a
universe whose complex depths his jealousy would like to plumb and which
are not without their fascination for his intellect.

Without quite counting myself among their number, I might perhaps, now
that Albertine was dead, learn the secret of her life. But do these
revelations, which occur only after a person’s terrestrial life is over,
not prove that nobody, deep down, believes in an after-life? If these
revelations are true, we should fear the resentment of the person whose
actions are uncovered as much on the day we will meet her in heaven as
we feared it during her lifetime, when we felt bound to honour her
secret. And if these revelations are false, made up because she is no
longer here to give the lie to them, we should fear the wrath of the
dead woman even more if we believed in heaven. But nobody does believe
in it. Thus it was possible that a long debate between staying and
leaving was staged in Albertine’s heart, but that her decision turned on
her aunt or on that young man, rather than on women, whom she may not
even have taken into account. The most weighty consideration which I
faced was that Andrée, who however no longer had anything to hide from
me about Albertine’s morals, swore to me that there was nothing of this
kind between Albertine on the one hand and Mlle de Vinteuil and her
girl-friend on the other (Albertine was unaware of her own inclinations
when she first met them and they, for fear of mistaking the object of
their desire – a fear that leads us into as many errors as does desire
itself – considered her to be very hostile to that sort of thing.
Perhaps much later they might have learned the conformity of her
inclinations with theirs, but by then they knew Albertine too well and
Albertine knew them too well even to think about indulging in such
things together.) In short, I was still no closer to understanding why
Albertine had left me. If a woman’s face is difficult to capture with
the eyes, which cannot take in the whole of its mobile surface, or with
the lips and even less with the memory, if her social position in
relation to our own social level clouds our appreciation, how much
thicker a curtain is drawn between those of her actions which we do
perceive and her motives! People’s motives lie at a deeper level, which
we cannot perceive, and moreover engender other actions, which we fail
to recognize and which are often in absolute contradiction with those
that we do recognize. Was there any period in history when there was
some public figure, believed saintly by his friends, who has not been
exposed for committing forgery, robbing the state or betraying his
country? How often every year is some great nobleman robbed by the
steward whom he has raised on his estate, whom he would have sworn was
an honest man and who perhaps was one! And yet how much more
impenetrable does this curtain which veils others’ motives become if we
feel love for that person! For it confuses our judgment and also the
actions of the woman, who, feeling herself loved, ceases suddenly to
attach any value to things that otherwise she would have treasured, such
as wealth, for instance. It may also tempt her partly to feign this
disdain for wealth in the hope of obtaining more by causing us to
suffer. Striking a bargain may be another factor, along with others, as
may even material events in her life, an intrigue that she has confided
to no one for fear that someone might reveal it to us, an intrigue
which, despite this precaution, many people might well have discovered
if they had had the same passionate desire to find out as we did, while
exercising greater independence of mind and arousing less suspicion in
the person concerned, an intrigue that was perhaps not unknown to
certain persons – but persons whom we neither know nor know how to
identify. And among all the reasons for her attitude towards us being
inexplicable, one must include those individual traits of character,
whether deriving from self-neglect, from hatred, from love of freedom,
from sudden attacks of anger, or from fear of what certain people might
think, which may drive a person to do the opposite of what we would have
expected. And then there are the differences in background and
education, which we prefer not to credit because, when we talk to each
other, our language effaces them, but which, when each one of us is
alone again, return to guide our several actions from such opposed
viewpoints that no real encounter is possible.

‘But my dear Andrée, you are lying again. Just remember – you admitted
it to me yourself, I telephoned you the day before, don’t you remember?
– how badly Albertine had wanted to go to Mme Verdurin’s reception on
the day that Mlle Vinteuil was due to appear but hid it from me as
something that I was not supposed to know. – Yes, but Albertine had no
way of knowing that Mlle Vinteuil would be there.’ ‘Really? You told me
yourself that she had met Mme Verdurin a few days earlier. Besides,
Andrée, there is no point in our deceiving each other. I found a note
this morning in Albertine’s room, a message from Mme Verdurin urging her
to come to her reception.’ And I showed her this note, which Françoise
had managed to bring to my attention a few days before Albertine’s
departure by placing it right on top of her affairs so that I would see
it, and leaving it there, I fear, in order to make Albertine think that
I had been rifling through her possessions or at least to let her know
that I had seen this note. And I often wondered if this stratagem,
devised by Françoise, had not strongly contributed to Albertine’s
departure, making her see that she could keep nothing private from me
and feel discouraged and beaten. I showed her the note: _I am
unrepentant, my perfectly normal family feelings are ample excuse_. ‘You
know, Andrée, don’t you, that Albertine always used to say that Mlle
Vinteuil’s girl-friend was in fact a mother or a sister for her. – But
you have misunderstood this note. The person that Mme Verdurin wanted
Albertine to meet was not her girl-friend at all but the fiancé, “the
also-ran”, and the family feelings were those felt by Mme Verdurin for
this scoundrel, who is in fact her nephew. And yet I think that
Albertine did find out later that Mlle Vinteuil was due to attend, Mme
Verdurin might have told her in passing. Of course she was pleased by
the idea that she would see her friend, and it recalled past happiness
but only in the way that you would be pleased, if you were going
somewhere, to know that Elstir would be there at the same time, but no
more, not even as much. No, if Albertine did not want to tell you why
she wanted to go to see Mme Verdurin, it was because there was a
rehearsal to which Mme Verdurin had invited just a very few people,
including this nephew whom you had met at Balbec, whom Mme Bontemps
wanted Albertine to marry and whom Albertine wanted to talk to. He was
quite a rascal. And then there is no need to look for so many
explanations,’ added Andrée, ‘God knows how I loved Albertine and how
good-natured she was but, especially since she had had typhoid fever (a
year before you met us all), she was a real tearaway. She suddenly
became disgusted with what she had been doing, she wanted to change, and
at a moment’s notice, although doubtless she didn’t even know why
herself. Do you remember the first year you came to Balbec, the year
when you met us all? One fine day she got someone to send her a telegram
calling her back to Paris, with hardly any time for us to help her pack.
But she had no reason to leave. All the excuses that she gave out were
false. Paris would be desperately dull for her at that time of year. We
were all still in Balbec. The golfing season was not over and even the
trials for the championship cup which she had so set her heart on had
not finished. She would surely have won it. There was only a week to go.
But there you are, off she went, at a gallop. I’ve often asked her about
it since. She said herself that she didn’t know why she left, that she
missed her little home (Paris as her “little home”, can you believe
it?), that she did not like Balbec, that she thought there were people
there who were making fun of her.’ And I thought that the element of
truth in what Andrée was saying was that, if differences between minds
explain the different impressions produced on one person and another by
the same work of art and differences in feeling explain the
impossibility of persuading someone to love you if they don’t, there are
also differences of character and even differing character traits within
a single individual which may motivate an action. Then I stopped musing
over this analysis and I reminded myself how difficult it is in life to
know the truth. I had of course noticed Albertine’s desire to go to Mme
Verdurin’s, and her dissimulation of it, and I had not been mistaken.
But just as we grasp one fact, other facts – the underside of a
tapestry, the secret behind an act or an intrigue or indeed the
intelligence of the heart – of which we never see more than appearances,
escape us, and we see only flat shadows pass, of which we say: this is
it, that is what it is; it is because of her or some other person. The
revelation that Mlle Vinteuil was due to come had seemed to me to be the
explanation, especially since Albertine had made the first move in
mentioning it to me. And later had she not refused to swear to me that
she took no pleasure in Mlle Vinteuil’s presence? And here on the
subject of the young man in question I recalled what I had forgotten. A
short time previously, while Albertine was living with me, I had met him
and, in contrast with his attitude in Balbec, he had been extremely
friendly, even affectionate, with me and had begged me to allow him to
call on me, although I had refused for a number of reasons. Now,
however, I realized that since he quite clearly knew that Albertine was
living in my house, he wanted to be in my good books in order to have a
free hand to come to see her and take her away from me and I concluded
that he was a wretch. Yet when some time later I had this young man’s
first works performed for me, I am sure that I continued to think that,
if he had been so keen to call on me, it was on account of Albertine and
although I blamed him for that, I remembered that if formerly I had set
out for Doncières to see Saint-Loup, it was in fact because I was
enamoured of Mme de Guermantes. It is true that the two cases were not
the same: since Saint-Loup was not in love with Mme de Guermantes, there
may well have been an element of duplicity in my affections but no
treachery. But afterwards I thought that we also feel affection for the
person who owns the object of our desire, even if he himself also loves
that same object. In this case of course we should struggle to resist a
friendship that must lead directly to betrayal. And I believe that this
is what I have always done. But in the case of those who are not strong
enough to do so, we cannot say that the friendship which they display
for the owner of the object of their desire is purely tactical, for they
sincerely feel it and because of this they show it with such ardour
that, once the treacherous deed has been perpetrated, it causes the
deceived husband or lover to declare with indignation and stupor: ‘If
only you could have heard the protestations of affection that the wretch
lavished on me! That someone should rob a man of his wealth, I can
understand. But that he should feel the diabolical need first to assure
him of his friendship shows a degree of ignominy and perversity that
beggars the imagination.’ And yet, there is no perverse pleasure
involved nor even any entirely lucid untruth. The affection of this sort
that Albertine’s pseudo-fiancé had shown me that day had yet another
excuse, for it was more complex than a simple offshoot of his love for
Albertine. It was only very recently that he realized, and admitted to
himself, that he wanted to be acknowledged as an intellectual. For the
first time pleasures other than those of sport or debauchery existed for
him. The fact that I was held in esteem by Elstir and Bergotte, that
Albertine had perhaps spoken to him of my opinions of writers, which led
her to believe that I could have been a writer myself, made me suddenly
seem to him (to the new man that he at last perceived himself to be)
someone interesting whom it would be pleasant to get to know better,
someone in whom he would have liked to confide his plans and perhaps
whom he might ask to introduce him to Elstir. As a result, he was
sincere when he asked if he might call on me, expressing a personal
sympathy, to which intellectual interest mingled with reflections of
Albertine gave added sincerity. Of course it was not for that reason
alone that he was so keen to call on me and would have dropped
everything in order to be able to do so. But this last reason, which did
hardly more than raise the first two to a level of paroxysmal passion,
was perhaps unknown to him and the two others did really exist, as
Albertine, when she wanted to go to see Mme Verdurin on the afternoon of
the rehearsal, may well have really felt a perfectly honourable pleasure
in seeing her childhood friends again, who were no more immoral in her
eyes than she was in theirs, chatting with them, showing them by her
very presence at the Verdurins’ that the poor little girl whom they had
known was now invited to a noted salon, as well as the pleasure that she
may well have felt in listening to Vinteuil’s music. If all that was
true, the blush that had come to Albertine’s cheeks when I had mentioned
Mlle Vinteuil came from the fact that I had done so on the subject of
the very reception which she had hoped to conceal from me because of the
marriage proposal, of which I was supposed to know nothing. Albertine’s
refusal to swear to me that she had felt no pleasure at seeing Mlle
Vinteuil that afternoon had at the time increased my torment and
strengthened my suspicions, but proved to me retrospectively that she
had wanted to be sincere and even in an innocent matter, perhaps
precisely because it was innocent. There remained, however, what Andrée
had told me about her relationship with Albertine. Perhaps, however,
even without going so far as to believe that Andrée was making it all up
solely in order to prevent me from feeling happy and from believing
myself superior to her, yet I could still suppose that she had somewhat
exaggerated what she used to do with Albertine and that Albertine,
narrowing her analytic criteria and making casuistic use of certain
definitions that I had foolishly formulated on the subject, also rather
understated what she had done with Andrée, finding that her relationship
with Andrée did not fall into the category of what she needed to confess
and that she could deny it without telling a lie. But why should I
believe that it was she rather than Andrée who had been lying? Truth and
life are indeed an uphill path, and, without ever really getting to know
them, I felt that the final impression which they left me was one where
sadness was perhaps still overshadowed by fatigue.²⁴
CHAPTER 3

_Staying in Venice_

My mother had taken me with her to spend a few weeks in Venice, and –
since we can find beauty not only in the humblest but also in the most
precious things – I sampled there impressions analogous to those that I
had so often felt previously in Combray, but transposed into an entirely
different, richer mode. When someone came to open my shutters at ten
o’clock in the morning, I saw the glow, not of the slates of St Hilaire
splendidly transfigured into black marble, but of the gold of the angel
on the bell-tower of St Mark’s. With outstretched arms, and so gleaming
with sunlight that it was almost impossible to behold him directly, he
promised me joy half an hour later on the Piazzetta, a promise more
reliable than his previous mission to bring tidings of Great Joy to men
of good will. He was all that I could glimpse, as long as I lay in bed,
but since the world is little more than a vast sundial where a single
sunlit segment allows us to tell the time, from the very first morning I
thought of the shops in the church square in Combray which were always
about to close when I arrived for Mass on Sundays, while the smell of
the straw in the market rankled under the burgeoning heat of the sun.
But by the second day, what I saw when I awoke, and my reason for rising
(because it had come to take the place of memories of Combray in my
memory and my desires), were the impressions of my first day in Venice,
Venice whose everyday life was no less real than that of Combray and
where it was a pleasure, as in Combray, to go down into the festive
street on Sunday mornings, but a street which was a whole stretch of
liquid sapphire, cooled by soft breezes and so deep-dyed that my tired
eyes could relax and look steadily at it with no fear that it might
fade. Just as in Combray’s rue de l’Oiseau the good citizens emerged
from houses aligned side by side in a row along the main street, so too
did the inhabitants of this new city; but the Combray houses’ habit of
casting a little shadow at their foot was entrusted to palaces of
porphyry and jasper, over whose arched doorways heads of bearded gods
jutted out of alignment, like the door knockers in Combray, and their
reflections darkened the tones, not of brown earth, but of splendid blue
waters. The shadow that would have flowed from the awning of the dress
shop or the hairdresser’s sign in Combray became, on the Piazza, the
little blue flowers that the relief of a Renaissance façade cast at its
foot over the desert of the sunlit paving stones, although it is true
that, in Venice as in Combray, when the sun beat down more strongly,
they were forced to lower their shutters on the banks of their canal.
But these shutters were deployed between the quatrefoils and the
tendrils of Gothic windows. You could say the same of our own hotel
window, at whose balustrade my mother waited for me, gazing at the canal
with a patience that she would never have shown before, in Combray, in
the days when she invested in me hopes that had never been rewarded and
wanted to hide from me the extent of her love for me. Now she clearly
felt that a show of coldness would change nothing, and the affection
which she lavished on me resembled the food that is no longer forbidden
to a sick person when we realize that they have no chance of recovery.
To be sure, the modest features that gave my aunt Léonie’s window
overlooking the rue de l’Oiseau its individual character – its asymmetry
caused by the unequal distance between the two neighbouring windows, the
excessive height of the wooden window-ledge, the bent handle that opened
the shutters and the two swathes of shiny blue satin that were separated
and held apart by tiebacks – could all find their echo in our hotel in
Venice. There too I heard that special, eloquent language which helps us
recognize from afar the dwelling where we come home to dine and which
later remains in our memory like a testimony declaring that for a period
of time this dwelling was ours; but in Venice the task of saying so
devolved, not as in Combray and almost everywhere else, upon the
simplest or even the ugliest things, but upon an ogive still half
recalling its Arabic origins, on a façade that is reproduced in every
illustrated book on art and cast in plaster in every museum, as one of
the masterpieces of medieval domestic architecture; I glimpsed this
ogive from far away, when I had only just passed by San Giorgio
Maggiore, and as it caught sight of me, its soaring lancet arches
supplemented its welcoming smile with a distinguished, superior, almost
impenetrable gaze. And, because, behind its multicoloured marble
balustrade, Mama waited for me, her face, while she read, surrounded by
a light veil of tulle (as heart-rendingly white for me as her hair)
which I sensed that my mother, on drying her eyes, had pinned to her
straw hat partly in order to seem ‘properly dressed’ in the eyes of the
hotel residents, but above all to seem to me to be less in mourning,
less sad, almost consoled for the death of my grandmother; because,
having not recognized me straight away, as soon as I called out to her
from my gondola, she sent her love winging its way towards me, from the
depths of her heart, a love that would cease only when it had no object
left to sustain it, on the surface of the passionate gaze which she cast
intensely in my direction, which she sought to enhance by forming her
lips into a smile which seemed, within the frame and beneath the canopy
of the more discreet smile of the ogive illuminated by the midday sun,
to lean forward to embrace me, – because of that, this window has taken
on in my memory the sweetness of things that played their part beside us
just as a particular hour chimed, the same for us and them; and, however
replete with admirable form its mullions may be, this illustrious window
bears for me the familiar features of a man of genius frequented by
chance for a month at a holiday resort and led to strike up a friendship
with us, and if thereafter, each time I see a cast of this window in a
museum, I have to fight back my tears, it is because it tells me quite
simply the thing that I find most moving of all, ‘I remember your mother
very well.’

Then as I went to meet Mama, who had left the window, I felt the same
sense of coolness on leaving the midday heat that I had experienced at
Combray when I went up to my bedroom; but in Venice it was wafted by a
sea breeze, and not up a small, narrow wooden staircase but up the noble
surfaces of marble steps, constantly splashed with flashes of glaucous
sunlight, adding the lesson of Veronese to the useful lesson of Chardin,
which I had learned on a previous occasion. And since in Venice it is
works of art and magnificent monuments that are entrusted with conveying
the impressions of everyday life, it would distort the nature of the
city, if, on the pretext that the most famous examples of the Venice of
certain painters are coldly aesthetic (except for some superb studies by
Maxime Dethomas¹), we were to represent only its impoverished aspects,
at the points where its habitual splendour fades, and if, in trying to
make Venice more familiar and true, we were to make it look like
Aubervilliers. Reacting quite naturally to the artificial Venice
produced by bad painters, we could reproach the greatest artists with
studying only the Venice that they found more realistic, with its humble
campi and deserted side canals. This was the Venice that I explored in
the afternoons, if I did not go out with my mother. For this was where I
found it easier to meet women of the people, match-sellers and
bead-stringers, glass- or lace-workers, young working-girls whose long
black, fringed shawls were no barrier to my love, since I had nearly
forgotten Albertine, yet some were more attractive than others, for I
did still remember her a little. I wonder if anyone could have told me
exactly how far, in this passionate perusal of Venetian women, what was
due to them, and what to Albertine, or my former desire to travel to
Venice. Our slightest desire, although striking its own, unique chord,
contains within it the fundamental notes on which our whole lives are
based. And if perchance we suppressed one or other of these notes, even
unheard, even unconscious, a note bearing absolutely no relation to the
object of our pursuit, we would none the less feel our whole desire for
this object fade away. There was much that I did not attempt to
elucidate in the midst of my excited pursuit of Venetian girls. My
gondola followed the side canals, as if the mysterious hand of a genie
were guiding me through the byways of this oriental city, the more I
advanced along the canals the more they seemed to show me the way,
slicing through a neighbourhood that they divided, as their narrow and
arbitrarily traced furrows barely perturbed the tall houses and their
small Moorish windows; and like a magical guide holding a candle between
his fingers to light my passage, they cast ahead of them a ray of
sunlight and opened a pathway for it. You could sense that between the
humble dwellings that the little canal had just divided, and which
otherwise would have formed a compact whole, there was so little space
available that a church bell-tower or a garden trellis would directly
overhang the _rio_, as in a flooded city. But for the churches, as for
the gardens which underwent the same process of transposition as
occurred in the Grand Canal, the sea was so willing to act as a means of
communication, like a side or main street, that on either side of the
Canaletto, churches rose out of the water in this old, crowded and poor
neighbourhood. They had become busy, humble parishes, openly displaying
the evidence of their run-down state and their frequentation by numerous
people of the lower classes; thus the gardens traversed by the trough of
the canal trailed their startled leaves and fruit down to the water’s
edge, and thus on the corner of a house whose rough-hewn sandstone was
still as raw as if freshly cut, little boys, caught off-guard but
maintaining their balance, dangled their seaworthy legs like those of
sailors sitting on a swinging bridge whose two halves had just parted,
letting the sea flow between them. Sometimes a more beautiful monument
appeared, popping up like a present in a lucky dip, a small ivory temple
with its Corinthian columns and its pediment adorned with an allegorical
statue, somewhat out of place in the midst of the everyday things with
which it was entangled, for although we made way for it to pass, the
peristyle that the canal had allotted to it still looked more like a
quay for unloading fruit and vegetables. I had the impression, further
enhanced by my desire, that I was not out of doors, but rather that I
was entering some increasingly secret place, for on every occasion I
found something new moving into place to one side of me or the other, a
small monument or an unsuspected _campo_ still endowed with that air of
surprise affected by beautiful things which we see for the first time
but whose aims and functions we do not yet understand. I returned on
foot by the narrow calli, stopping to talk to working-girls, as
Albertine might have done before me, and I wished that she were with me.
Yet they could not be the same girls; at the time when Albertine was in
Venice they would still have been children. But whereas previously I had
been unfaithful through cowardice in one way or another to each of the
desires that I had at first believed unique, since I had sought an
analogous object rather than the original which I no longer hoped to
find, now I quite deliberately sought out women that Albertine had not
known in person, and even avoided those women that I had previously
desired. It is true that I often recalled, with the violence of
unassuaged desire, some girl from Méséglise or Paris, like the milkmaid
seen at the foot of a hill one morning on my first trip to Balbec. Alas,
however, I remembered them as they were then, that is, such as they
certainly were no longer. In this way, where formerly I would have been
led to inflect my impression of the constancy of desire by seeking to
replace a convent schoolgirl that I had lost sight of by a similar
schoolgirl, now when I sought out the adolescent girls that had
disturbed me or Albertine, I had to allow yet another exception to the
rule of the uniqueness of desire; those I now must chase were not the
girls who were sixteen at the time, but those who were sixteen now, for
what I now loved, despite the specific qualities of the person, and what
escaped me, was youth itself. I realized that the youth of the girls
whom I had known existed only in the fires of my memory, and that it was
not the girls themselves, however desirous of obtaining them I was when
my memory presented them to me, that I should pluck, if I truly wanted
to harvest the season’s youth in full flower.

The sun was still high in the sky when I went to meet my mother on the
Piazzetta. We hailed a gondola. ‘How your poor grandmother would have
loved such simple elegance!’ Mama said to me, pointing out the Doges’
Palace as it contemplated the sea, imbued with the ideas that the
architect had entrusted it with and which it faithfully conserved, as it
mounted a silent watch for its absent Doges. ‘She would even have liked
the delicacy of those shades of pink, because there is nothing mawkish
about them. How your grandmother would have loved Venice, and how
familiar, how close to nature, she would have found all this beauty, so
full of things that it needs no arrangement, offering itself in its own
guise, the Doges’ Palace with its cubic forms, the columns that you say
come from Herod’s Palace, in the middle of the Piazzetta and, even less
calculated, placed as if space were lacking elsewhere, the pillars of St
John of Acre and the horses on the balcony of St Mark’s! Your
grandmother would have been as delighted to see the sun set on the
Doges’ Palace as over a mountain-top.’ And there was indeed some truth
in what my mother said, for, while the gondola brought us back up the
Grand Canal, we watched the line of palaces as we passed between them
reflecting the changing light and the passing day on their pink flanks,
changing with them, less after the fashion of private dwellings and
famous monuments than that of a chain of marble cliffs beneath which we
travel by boat in the evening to watch the sun set. Thus the dwellings
disposed on either side of the canal reminded us of natural sites, but
inspired by a nature using the human imagination to create its works.
Yet at the same time (because of the constantly urban nature of the
impressions offered by Venice, despite being set almost out at sea, on
its waves where the ebb and flow of the tide are perceptible twice a day
and which first at high tide flood over, and then at low tide uncover
the magnificent external staircases of the palaces), as we would have
done in Paris on the boulevards, on the Champs-Élysées or in the Bois or
any wide, fashionable avenue, we passed in the misty evening light the
most beautiful women, nearly all foreign, leaning languidly on the
cushions of their floating equipage, waiting in line, stopping at a
palace, asking if the friend that they wanted to call on was at home
and, while awaiting the reply, they prepared their card just in case, in
order to leave it as they would have done at the door of the Hôtel de
Guermantes, consulting their guide-book to check the period and the
style of the palace, even as they were rocked all the while by the
eddies of these sparkling, spirited waters, as if on the crest of a blue
wave which reared in panic to feel itself caught between the dancing
gondola and the resounding marble. And thus even an outing to call on a
friend or to do some shopping was not only three things in one but still
unique, in this Venice where the slightest social call takes on at once
both the form and the charm of a visit to a museum and that of a naval
manoeuvre.

Several of the palaces on the Grand Canal had been converted into
hotels, and, whether because we fancied a change or from politeness
towards Mme Sazerat, whom we had chanced to encounter – as one always
meets some unforeseen, inopportune acquaintance on any journey – and
whom Mama had invited out, we wished to try dinner in a different hotel
from our own, one where they claimed that the cuisine was better. While
my mother was paying the gondolier and escorting Mme Sazerat into the
private room that she had booked, I preferred to take a look at the main
dining-hall of the restaurant, with its fine marble pillars, once
entirely covered with frescoes, which had since been badly restored. Two
waiters were conversing in Italian, which I translate as follows:

‘Are the old couple going to eat in their room? They never give notice.
What a nuisance, I don’t know whether to reserve their table (_non so se
bisogna conservar loro la tavola_). Oh well, who cares if they do come
down and find that it’s taken! I can’t understand why we invite
_forestieri_ like them to stay in such a chic hotel. They are not our
kind of people.’

Despite his disdain, the waiter would have preferred to know what
decision to take about the table, and he was on the point of sending the
liftboy up to their floor to find out, when, before he had time to ask,
the answer was given: he had just spotted the old lady entering the
room. Despite the sad and tired air that the weight of passing years
bestows, and despite a sort of red, leprous eczema covering her face, I
had no difficulty in recognizing beneath her bonnet, in her black tunic,
created by W***,² but looking to the uninitiated as if it belonged to an
old concierge, the Marquise de Villeparisis. As chance would have it,
the place where I stood studying the remains of a fresco on the fine
marble wall was behind the very table where Mme de Villeparisis had just
sat down.

‘So M. de Villeparisis will soon be down. During the month that they’ve
spent here they have only once eaten separately,’ said the waiter.

I was wondering with which of her relatives it was she was travelling
and whom they were calling M. de Villeparisis, when, a few moments
later, I saw him approach her table and sit down beside her. It was her
former lover, M. de Norpois.

His advanced age had affected the timbre of his voice, but on the other
hand had made his language, formerly so reserved, truly intemperate.
Perhaps the cause should be sought in the ambitions that he felt he no
longer had time to achieve and which filled him with all the more
vehemence and excitement; perhaps in the fact that, abandoned by the
political life which he had longed to engage in, he believed, with the
naïvety born of desire, that his withering criticism of those he aspired
to replace would drive them into retirement. Thus we see politicians
convinced that the cabinet to which they have not been appointed cannot
last out the week. It would in any case be excessive to claim that M. de
Norpois had entirely forgotten the traditional usage of diplomatic
language. As soon as conversation turned to ‘affairs of state’, he
became once more, as we shall see, the man whom we previously knew, but
for the rest of the time he held forth about one rival or another with
the senile violence that drives some octogenarians to run after women,
despite being in no position to cause them harm.

For a few moments Mme de Villeparisis remained silent as if an old
woman’s fatigue made it difficult for her to return to the present from
reminiscence of the past. Then, with the sort of quite practical
question that bears the hallmark of the aftermath of reciprocal love,
she asked:

‘Did you go to Salviati’s?’³

‘Yes.’

‘Will they send it tomorrow?’

‘I brought the bowl home myself. I’ll show you it after dinner. Let’s
look at the menu.’

‘Have you instructed the brokers to deal with my Suez shares?’

‘No, the stock market has no time for the moment to invest in anything
but oil. But there is no cause for concern, given the excellent state of
the economy. Here’s the menu. There’s mullet for the first course. Shall
we have some?

‘I’ll have it myself, but you know that you mustn’t. Ask for a risotto
instead. Except that they don’t know how to cook it.’

‘That doesn’t matter. Waiter, bring some mullet for Madam to start with
and a risotto for me.’

They fell silent again for a while.

‘By the way, I’ve brought you some newspapers, the _Corriere della
Sera,_ the _Gazzetta del Popolo_,⁴ etcetera. Did you know that a
diplomatic reshuffle is confidently predicted and that the prime
scapegoat is rumoured to be Paléologue,⁵ who is notoriously inadequate
in Serbia? They say he’ll be replaced by Lozé,⁶ which would leave a
vacancy in Constantinople. But’, M. de Norpois hastened to add bitterly,
‘for an embassy of this scope, where it is quite evident that come what
may Great Britain will always have to be seated at the head of the
negotiating table, it would be advisable to seek out men of experience
better equipped to detect the snares laid by the enemies of our British
ally than the diplomats of the new school, who are bound to fall
headlong into the traps.’ The irritable loquacity with which M. de
Norpois uttered these last words was inspired above all by the fact that
the newspapers, instead of mentioning his name as he had advised them,
gave as ‘leading candidate’ a youthful minister of foreign affairs. ‘God
knows what kind of tortuous manœuvres they use to prevent men of
maturity from placing themselves _in loco_ and _situ_ of more or less
incapable new recruits! I have known quite enough of all these so-called
diplomats of the empirical school, who placed all their hopes in a trial
run that soon ran out of steam. There is no doubt at all, if the
government so lacks wisdom as to place the reins of state in unsteady
hands, that there will always be a conscript ready to answer the call of
duty with the cry of “present!”. But, who knows’ (and M. de Norpois
appeared to know all too well of whom he was talking) ‘whether the same
reaction might not be obtained if peradventure one were to seek out some
veteran replete with knowledge and skill. As I see it, and everyone will
have his own interpretation, the Constantinople posting should be
accepted only on settlement of our outstanding problems with Germany. We
owe nothing to anyone, and it is unacceptable that every six months we
should be inveigled over our dead bodies into fraudulent procedures in
order to pronounce some spurious acquittal, advocated as usual by a
venal press. This must cease, and it is natural that a man of great
value, who has proved his worth, a man who, dare I say, has the ear of
the Emperor, should enjoy more authority than any to bring the conflict
to its ultimate conclusion.’

A gentleman who had finished dining greeted M. de Norpois.

‘Why, if it isn’t Prince Foggi!’ said the Marquis.

‘I’m afraid that I’m not sure who you mean,’ sighed Mme de Villeparisis.

‘But of course you do, it’s Prince Odon. He’s the actual brother-in-law
of your cousin Mme Doudeauville. Surely you remember that I hunted with
him at Bonnétable?’

‘Oh, Odon! Is he the one that went in for painting?’

‘Not in the least, he’s the one who married the sister of the Grand Duke
of N***.’

M. de Norpois held Mme de Villeparisis steadily in his gaze while he
said all this, with the rather disagreeable tone of a teacher displeased
with his pupil.

When the Prince had finished his coffee and left his table, M. de
Norpois rose and walked meaningfully towards him, then, moving to one
side with a lordly gesture, introduced him to Mme de Villeparisis. And
during the few minutes that the Prince stood talking to them, M. de
Norpois’s blue eyes subjected Mme de Villeparisis to the relentless
surveillance borne of the indulgence or sanctions of a former lover, and
above all of fear that she might indulge in one of the lapses in
linguistic propriety which he appreciated but dreaded. Whenever she said
something inaccurate to the Prince, he corrected her remarks and looked
straight into the obedient eyes of the subjugated Marquise with the
sustained intensity of a hypnotist.

A waiter came to tell me that my mother was waiting for me. I went over
to her and apologized to Mme Sazerat, explaining that I had been amused
to see Mme de Villeparisis. On hearing this name, Mme Sazerat turned
pale and seemed about to faint. She struggled to keep her composure:

‘Mme de Villeparisis, Mlle de Bouillon?’ she enquired.

‘Yes.’

‘Couldn’t I look at her for a moment? I have dreamed of this all my
life.’

‘Yes, but don’t take too long, Madam, for she will soon have finished
dining. But why should she interest you so?’

‘Because it was Mme de Villeparisis, the Duchesse d’Havré by her first
marriage, as beautiful as an angel but as wicked as a witch, who drove
my father mad, ruined him, then left him forthwith. And yet! Although
she acted like a common whore and caused me and my family to live in
straitened circumstances in Combray, now that my father is dead, I
console myself with the thought that he loved the most beautiful woman
of his day, and since I have never seen her, despite everything it will
be a relief …’

I led Mme Sazerat, who was trembling with emotion, to the restaurant and
pointed out Mme de Villeparisis.

But, like the blind, who direct their eyes everywhere but where they
should, Mme Sazerat failed to focus her gaze on Mme de Villeparisis’s
dinner-table, and sought out another corner of the room.

‘Well, she must have left, I can’t see her where you say.’

And she continued to hunt for the detestable, adorable vision that had
haunted her imagination for so long.

‘No she hasn’t, she’s at the second table.’

‘We must be starting our count from different ends. At what I call the
second table there’s only an old gentleman sitting beside a horrid
little old lady with a red face and a hunchback.’

‘That’s her!’

Meanwhile, Mme de Villeparisis had asked M. de Norpois to invite Prince
Foggi to be seated, and the three of them had struck up an amiable
conversation. Politics were mentioned. The Prince declared that he was
unconcerned by the fate of the cabinet and that he intended to stay in
Venice for at least a week. He hoped that by then any ministerial crisis
would have been averted.

At first Prince Foggi thought that these political issues were of no
interest to M. de Norpois, for the latter, who had until then expressed
himself so vehemently, had suddenly adopted an almost angelic silence,
which seemed only likely to flower, if his voice were restored, into
some melodious, innocent song by Mendelssohn or César Franck. The Prince
also thought that this silence was due to the inhibitions of a Frenchman
unwilling to discuss Italian affairs in the presence of an Italian. Here
the Prince was entirely mistaken. In M. de Norpois’s case, silence and
an air of indifference had always been the sign not of inhibition but
the customary prelude to his involvement in an important affair. As we
have seen, the Marquis’s goal was no less than Constantinople, and a
prior settlement of the German question, in which matter he hoped to put
pressure on the cabinet in Rome. Indeed the Marquis judged that his
accomplishing an act bearing international repercussions might form a
noble climax to his career, and perhaps even open the way to new
honours, or tasks of a difficulty that he had not yet eschewed. For old
age removes the ability to act, but not to desire. It is only in a third
phase that those who live to a great age renounce desire, after being
obliged to abandon action. They no longer stand for such petty elections
as that of President of the Republic, where they so often formerly
strove to succeed. They are content merely to go out, to eat, and to
read the newspapers. They have outlived themselves.

In order to put the Marquis at ease and show him that he considered him
a compatriot, the Prince started to speak of possible successors to the
present Prime Minister, who would have a difficult task ahead of them.
Only when Prince Foggi had cited more than twenty names of politicians
whom he considered of ministerial capacity, which the former ambassador
listened to without moving, half-closing the lids of his blue eyes, did
M. de Norpois finally break his silence to utter the words which were to
fuel conversation in ambassadorial circles for twenty years to come and
which later, when they had been forgotten, would be exhumed by some
personality signing themselves ‘an insider’, or ‘Testis’⁷ or
‘Machiavelli’ in a newspaper where the very oblivion into which they had
sunk provided the impetus to generate a new sensation. So, Prince Foggi
having cited these twenty-odd names for the benefit of a diplomat who
remained as silent and motionless as a deaf man, M de Norpois raised his
head slightly and, using the formula that had inspired his most
influential diplomatic interventions, albeit this time with exceptional
boldness and less brevity, finally asked, ‘And has nobody mentioned the
name of M. Giolitti?’⁸ On hearing these words, the scales fell away from
Prince Foggi’s eyes; he heard the murmuring of celestial voices. Then
suddenly M. de Norpois started to talk of this and that, with no concern
for the noise he was making, as when, after the last note of a sublime
Beethoven aria has sounded, nobody minds speaking out loud or going to
collect his coat from the cloakroom. He made the transition even more
brutal by begging the Prince to transmit his respects to their Majesties
the King and the Queen when next he might see them, a parting shot
matching the effect of someone shouting at the end of a concert,
‘Coachman Auguste, from the rue de Belloy!’ We cannot say what were
Prince Foggi’s precise impressions. He was certainly delighted to have
heard this masterpiece: ‘And has nobody mentioned the name of M.
Giolitti?’ For M. de Norpois, whose finest qualities had been
extinguished or disrupted by age, had none the less perfected as he grew
older his ‘air of bravado’, as certain musicians, with most of their
faculties in decline, acquire towards the end of their days a perfect
virtuosity in chamber music which they had not previously possessed.

At all events, Prince Foggi, who had intended to spend two weeks in
Venice, returned to Rome that very same day and was received a few days
later in audience by the King to discuss some properties, which I
believe we have mentioned, that the Prince possessed in Sicily. The
cabinet hung on for longer than anyone had predicted. When it fell, the
King took advice from various statesmen as to who should lead the new
cabinet. Then he sent for M. Giolitti, who accepted. Three months later
a newspaper related Prince Foggi’s interview with M. de Norpois. The
conversation was reported in the terms that we have given, with the
difference that instead of saying, ‘M. de Norpois asked subtly’, the
article read: ‘said with his notoriously subtle and charming smile’. M.
de Norpois judged that ‘subtly’ already had explosive force enough for a
diplomat and that this addendum was intemperate, to say the least. He
had in fact asked the Quai d’Orsay to issue an official denial, but the
Quai d’Orsay was out of its depth. For indeed, as soon as the interview
had been revealed, M. Barrère⁹ telephoned Paris several times a day to
complain that there was an unofficial ambassador at the Quirinal and to
report the displeasure that this fact had caused all over Europe. This
displeasure was non-existent, but the various ambassadors were too
polite to contradict M. Barrère when he assured them that everyone was
outraged. M. Barrère, who brooked no counsel but his own, took their
courteous silence for consent. He telegraphed Paris immediately to say:
‘HAVE HAD AN HOUR-LONG CONVERSATION WITH THE MARQUIS
VISCONTI-VENOSTA’,¹⁰ etc. His secretaries were at their wits’ end.

Yet M. de Norpois benefited from the devoted services of a most ancient
French newspaper,¹¹ which had even, in 1870 when he was French
ambassador in a German country, done him a great favour. This newspaper,
and especially its anonymous leading article, was admirably written.
But, paradoxically, it aroused infinitely more interest when this leader
(dubbed the ‘Paris première’ in those far-off days, and called now, we
know not why, an ‘editorial’) was badly phrased, with endless
repetitions of words. Then everyone felt moved, realizing that the
article had been ‘inspired’, perhaps by M. de Norpois, perhaps by some
other fashionable grand master. Anticipating later events in Italy, we
might show how M. de Norpois used this newspaper in 1870, to no avail,
one might feel, since the war none the less took place; but very
effectively, in the opinion of M. de Norpois, whose axiom was that above
all one should prepare public opinion. His articles, where every word
was carefully weighed, resembled those optimistic medical bulletins
published immediately after the death of the patient. For instance, in
1870, when mobilization was almost complete, M. de Norpois, still in the
wings, of course, had judged it necessary to send this famous newspaper
the following editorial:

‘The prevailing opinion in official circles would appear to be that,
since yesterday, towards the middle of the afternoon, the situation,
without of course assuming an alarming aspect, might well be considered
serious and even, from certain angles, susceptible of being judged
critical. M. de Norpois is believed to have held several discussions
with the King of Prussia, in order to examine in a spirit of firmness
and reconciliation, and in the most concrete terms, the various causes
of tension, if one may call them such. As we go to press we have
unfortunately received no news as to whether their Excellencies have
been able to come to an agreement which might serve as the basis of a
diplomatic settlement.

‘Latest news: it has been learned with satisfaction in well-informed
circles that Franco-Prussian relations have apparently experienced a
slight improvement. The most important factor would seem to be a meeting
of twenty minutes’ duration _unter den Linden_ between M. de Norpois and
the English ambassador. This news is considered by those with access to
inside information to be satisfactory.’ (The German word _befriedigend_
had been added in brackets after its equivalent, ‘satisfactory’). And
the following day the editorial read: ‘Despite all the subtlety of M. de
Norpois, who is praised by all for the skilful efforts which he has
managed to deploy in the defence of the imprescriptible interests of
France, a breakdown in relations appears to be virtually impossible to
avoid, if one may say so.’

The newspaper could not forgo the opportunity of following such an
editorial with several commentaries, sent of course by M. de Norpois.
The reader may perhaps have noticed how in the passages quoted the
‘passive’ mood was one of the ambassador’s favourite grammatical forms
for diplomatic writing. (‘Considerable importance appears to be
attached’, rather than ‘it seems that people attach considerable
importance’). But the present indicative, taken not in its habitual
sense but in that of the old ‘optative’, was no less close to M. de
Norpois’s heart. The commentaries that followed the editorial were
these:

‘Never has the public demonstrated a more admirable calm.’ (M. de
Norpois would have preferred this to be true, but feared that the
opposite was the case). ‘The people are tired of sterile agitation and
have been satisfied to learn that His Majesty’s government would accept
its responsibilities in the case of whatever eventuality should
materialize. The people ask (optative mood) for no more. To their
admirably steady nerve, which already bodes well for success, we would
yet add a piece of news sure to reassure public opinion, if need there
were. We have been assured that M. de Norpois, who for reasons of health
has long been expected to travel to Paris to undertake a brief cure, has
left Berlin, where he felt that his presence was no longer necessary.
Latest news: His Majesty the Emperor left Compiègne for Paris this
morning in order to confer with the Marquis de Norpois, the Minister for
War and Field-Marshal Bazaine, in whom the public places especial
confidence. H M the Emperor has called off the dinner that he was to
host in honour of his sister-in-law the Duchess of Alba. This measure
has produced on everyone who has been informed of it a particularly
favourable impression. The Emperor has reviewed his troops, whose
enthusiasm beggars description. Several armed units, which were
mobilized the moment that the royal family reached Paris, are standing
ready to depart for the Rhine in case the eventuality should arise.’

Sometimes at dusk on my return to the hotel I felt that the Albertine of
former times, although invisible, was none the less locked deep inside
me, as if in the lead-lined cells of some inner Venice,¹² where from
time to time an incident would shake the heavy lid enough to give me a
glimpse into the past.

Thus for instance one evening a letter from my broker reopened for an
instant the gates of the prison where Albertine lay living within me,
but so far and so deep that she remained inaccessible to me. Since her
death I was no longer engaged in the speculations that I had undertaken
in order to have more money to spend on her. But time had passed; the
received wisdom of the previous era was nullified by the present one, as
had happened in former times to M. Thiers,¹³ who declared that the
railway could never succeed, thus the shares of which M. de Norpois had
said, ‘Doubtless their yield is hardly substantial, but at least the
capital will never depreciate,’ were often those that had lost the most
value. If only for the English Consols and the Say Refineries, I had to
pay the brokers such considerable differentials, not to mention the
interest and the sums carried forward, that I suddenly took it into my
head to sell everything, and found myself forthwith the owner of barely
one-fifth of the wealth that I had inherited from my grandmother and had
still possessed while Albertine was alive. This was known to those of
our family and acquaintances who still lived in Combray, and because
they knew that I frequented the Marquis de Saint-Loup and the
Guermantes, people said, ‘That’s where delusions of grandeur lead you.’
They would have been quite astonished to learn that it was for a young
woman of such modest extraction as Albertine, more or less a protégée of
my grandmother’s old piano teacher, Vinteuil, that I had been
speculating. Moreover in this world of Combray, where everyone is
classified once and for all time, as in the Hindu caste system,
according to his known income, they were unable to conceive of the great
liberty that reigned in the world of the Guermantes, where wealth was
considered of no importance, where poverty could be regarded as
unpleasant but as in no way more undignified, and having no more impact
on one’s social status, than an upset stomach. No doubt, on the other
hand, people in Combray imagined that Saint-Loup and M. de Guermantes
were ruined noblemen with mortgaged châteaux to whom I lent money,
whereas, if I had been ruined, they would have been the first to offer
me assistance, albeit to no avail. As for my present, relative ruin, I
was all the more embarrassed since my Venetian pursuits had just
recently focused on a girl selling glassware, whose blooming complexion
offered my ravished eyes a whole scale of amber tones, inspiring in me
such a desire to see her every day that, realizing that my mother and I
would soon be leaving Venice, I had resolved to try to find her some
situation in Paris which would enable me not to be separated from her.
The beauty of her seventeen years was so noble and radiant that she
became a virtual Titian painting to be acquired before leaving. Yet
would the reduced income available to me be sufficient to tempt her to
leave her country and come to live in Paris at my entire disposal? But
as I finished reading my broker’s letter, a phrase where he said: ‘_I
will take care of any sums to be carried forward_’ brought to mind an
almost equally hypocritical and professional expression, that the
bath-house girl at Balbec had used when speaking of Albertine: ‘_I took
care of her personally_,’ she had said. And these words, which I had
never before recalled, had the effect of crying ‘Open, Sesame’, making
the hinges of the dungeon spring open. But a moment later they swung
back again to reincarcerate the prisoner – whom I was not guilty of not
wanting to visit, since I could no longer see her or remember her, and
since people exist for us only in the idea that we have of them – who
for an instant had been rendered more touching by my neglect, although
she could not know of this: for one brief flash I had felt nostalgia for
that already distant time when I suffered night and day from the company
of her memory. On another occasion, at San Giorgio dei Schiavoni,¹⁴ an
eagle beside one of the apostles, and worked in the same style, revived
the memory, and a great deal of the suffering caused by the two rings
whose similarity Françoise had discovered, although I had never
discovered who had given them to Albertine. One evening however it
appeared that events were going to rekindle my love. Just as our gondola
stopped at the steps of the hotel, the porter handed me a despatch that
the telegraph boy had tried three times to bring round to me, for,
because of the inexactitude of the name of the addressee (which I
understood, however, despite the distortions wrought by the Italian
operators, to be my own), I was required to sign a receipt certifying
that the telegram was indeed intended for me. I opened it as soon as I
was in my room, and running my eye down a text full of mistranscribed
words, I managed to read the following: ‘DEAR FRIEND YOU BELIEVE ME
DEAD, MY APOLOGIES, NEVER MORE ALIVE, WOULD LIKE TO SEE YOU TO DISCUSS
MARRIAGE, WHEN DO YOU RETURN? AFFECTIONATELY, ALBERTINE.’ Then occurred,
but in inverse order, what had happened with my grandmother; when I
learned _the fact_ that my grandmother was dead, I at first felt no
sorrow. And I had really suffered from her death only when involuntary
memories had rendered her living again for me. Now that Albertine was no
longer alive in my thoughts, the news that she was alive did not bring
me the joy that I would have expected. Albertine had been for me but a
bundle of thoughts, she had survived her material death as long as these
thoughts remained alive within me; on the contrary now that these
thoughts were dead, Albertine did not come back to life for me along
with the resuscitation of her body. And on realizing that I felt no joy
at finding her still alive, that I no longer loved her, I should have
been more overwhelmed than someone who, looking at himself in a mirror,
after months of travel or illness, realizes that he has white hair or an
expression altered by age. This upsets him because it means: the man
that I was, that fair-haired young man, no longer exists, I am someone
else. And is it not just as profound a change, just as total a death of
the self that one was, with its complete substitution of this new self
for the old, to see a wrinkled face coiffed with a white wig? But we no
more lament having become someone else with the passing of the years and
the fullness of time than we lament being during the same period a
sequence of contradictory beings, the wicked, the sensitive, the
fragile, the crass, the disinterested or the ambitious that we are in
turn day after day. And the reason for which we do not lament is the
same, it is because the self who is in eclipse – momentarily in the
latter examples, which affect our character, permanently in the case I
have mentioned and whenever the passions are concerned – is no longer
there to deplore the other self, the one who at that moment, or
henceforth, is entirely you; the crass man laughs at his crassness
because we are now that crass man, and the absent-minded man feels no
sorrow at losing his memory, precisely because he has forgotten all
about it.

I would have been incapable of reviving Albertine because I was
incapable of reviving myself, of reviving my former self. Life, with its
habit of changing the face of the world through incessant but infinitely
small adjustments, had not told me the day after the death of Albertine
to ‘Become someone else’, but, through changes too imperceptible to
allow me even to notice the fact that I was changing, had renewed almost
everything about me, in such a way that my thoughts were already
accustomed to their new master – my new self – by the time they noticed
that he had changed; and that it was he who mattered. My affection for
Albertine and my jealousy depended, as we have seen, on the irradiation
by association of ideas of certain kernels of sweet or painful
impressions, on the memory of Mlle Vinteuil at Montjouvain, on the
gentle good-night kisses that Albertine bestowed on my neck. But as
these impressions grew weaker, the vast field of impressions that they
dyed with their anxious or soothing tints had recovered their neutral
tones. Once oblivion had captured one or two high peaks of suffering and
pleasure, the resistance of my love was vanquished, I no longer loved
Albertine. I tried to call her to mind. When two days after Albertine’s
departure I was horrified to find that I had survived forty-eight hours
without her, that was an accurate foreboding. The same thing had
happened when on a previous occasion I had written to Gilberte,
thinking: if this goes on for another two years, I shall love her no
longer. And if when Swann had asked me to see Gilberte again, I had felt
as uncomfortable as if I were asked to welcome her back from the dead,
in Albertine’s case death – or what I had believed to be death – had
functioned to the same effect as the prolonged separation in the case of
Gilberte. Death functions only as absence. The monster whose appearance
had made my love tremble, oblivion, had indeed finally, or so I
believed, devoured it. Not only did the news that she was alive not
reawaken my love, not only did it allow me to note how far I had
travelled down the road to indifference, but it instantaneously
accelerated the process so abruptly that I wondered retrospectively if
formerly, the opposite news, that of Albertine’s death, had not acted
inversely, by completing the process of her departure, exciting my love
and delaying its decline. And indeed, as soon as knowing that she was
alive and that I could reach her had made her suddenly worthless to me,
I wondered whether Françoise’s insinuations, the separation itself, and
even her death (imagined but believed to be real) had not prolonged my
love, in so far as the efforts of third parties or even fate to separate
us from a woman do no more than attach us more closely to her. Now it
was the opposite that happened. Actually I did try to recall her, and
perhaps because I had only to say the word to have her all to myself,
the memory that recurred was that of a girl already quite stout and
mannish, in whose faded features there sprouted like a seed the profile
of Mme Bontemps. What she might have done with Andrée or other girls was
no longer of interest to me. I no longer suffered from the malady that I
had so long believed to be incurable, and in fact I might have guessed
as much. Of course missing a mistress, and the jealousy that lingers on
afterwards, are physical illnesses just as much as tuberculosis or
leukaemia. Yet we need to distinguish among the physical maladies
between those that are caused by a purely physical agency and those that
act on the body only through the medium of the intellect. Above all, if
the part of our intellect that serves as the means of transmission is
memory – that is if the cause is annulled or removed – however cruel our
suffering is, however deep seems the disturbance wrought on our
organism, it is extremely rare, given the power of thought to renew
itself or rather its inability to remain unchanged, unlike bodily
tissues, for the prognosis to be unfavourable. After a period of time
within which a patient suffering from cancer would have died, it is very
rare for a widow or an unconsolable father not to have recovered. I
recovered. Should I for the sake of that girl, who now appeared to me so
bloated and who certainly must have aged as all the girls that she had
loved had aged, should I for her sake renounce the dazzling girl who was
my memory of yesterday, my hope for tomorrow (and to whom I would be
unable to offer anything if married to Albertine), should renounce this
‘new Albertine’, ‘_non point telle que l’ont vue les Enfers’ ‘mais
fidèle, mais fière et même un peu farouche_’?¹⁵ It was she who now was
what Albertine had formerly been: my love for Albertine had been only a
passing form of my devotion to youth. We think we love a girl, and in
her we love no more, alas, than that dawn which their face momentarily
reflects. The night passed. In the morning I returned the despatch to
the hotel porter saying that it had been handed to me by mistake and
that it wasn’t addressed to me. He told me that the fact that it had
been opened would cause him problems, that I would do better to keep it;
I put it back in my pocket but promised myself that I would act as if I
had never received it. I had definitively stopped loving Albertine. In
such fashion this love, after diverging so much from what I had
foreseen, in the light of my love for Gilberte; after causing me to make
such a long and painful detour, finally in its turn, after claiming
exemption, surrendered, as had my love for Gilberte, to the universal
rule of oblivion.

But then I wondered: I used to value Albertine more than myself; I no
longer value her now because for a period of time I have ceased to see
her. But my desire not to be separated from myself by death, to revive
after death, was a desire unlike the desire never to be separated from
Albertine, it continued to last. Was that because I believed I was more
precious than she, because when I loved her, I loved myself more? No, it
was because in ceasing to see her, I had ceased to love her, and because
I had not ceased to love myself since my daily relationship with myself
had not been interrupted as had that with Albertine. But what if the
relationship with my body, and with myself, had also been interrupted?
Surely the result would be the same. Our love of life is no more than an
old affair that we do not know how to discontinue. Its strength lies in
its permanence. But death, which interrupts it, will cure us of our
desire for immortality.

After lunch, whenever I did not set out to wander around Venice alone, I
got ready to go out with my mother, and I went up to my bedroom to fetch
the exercise books in which I would take notes for the study of Ruskin
that I was engaged in.¹⁶ From the abrupt angles of the wall whose
pressure distorted the corners of the room, I could sense the
restrictions imposed by the sea and the scant provision of land. And as
I went down to meet my mother, who was waiting for me, at this time of
day when in Combray it was such a pleasure to sample the imminent sun in
the darkness preserved by the closed shutters, here from top to bottom
of the marble staircase, where one had no more idea than one would in a
Renaissance painting whether it was built inside a palace or raised on a
galley, the same coolness and the same feeling of external radiance were
achieved thanks to the canvas blinds wafting before the ever-open
windows, through which in a constant draught the warm air and the
greenish sunlight slid as if on a floating surface, evoking the
movements, the brightness and the instability of the neighbouring waves.
Most often it was St Mark’s that I set out for, and with all the more
pleasure because the church, which required a gondola to reach it, did
not represent for me a mere monument, but as it were the terminus of a
marine journey over springtime waters, with which St Mark’s formed an
indivisible, living whole. My mother and I entered the baptistery, both
of us treading underfoot the marble and glass mosaics which paved it,
and seeing before us the wide arches, whose waisted, pink surfaces have
been slightly inflected by the passage of time, which, where time has
respected the freshness of its colouring, lends the church an air of
having been constructed from a soft and malleable material like the wax
of giant honeycomb cells; but where, on the contrary, time has hardened
the material and where artists have enhanced it with openwork and gold,
it takes on the guise of some precious binding in Cordoban leather of
the colossal gospel formed by Venice. My mother, seeing that I needed to
spend a long time studying the mosaics representing the baptism of
Christ and feeling the ice-cold air that fell around us in the
baptistery, threw a shawl over my shoulders. When I was in Balbec with
Albertine, I thought that she illustrated one of those misguided
illusions that cloud the minds of so many people unable to think
clearly, when she told me of the pleasure – which I judged entirely
unfounded – that she would derive from seeing a picture in my company.
Today I am sure that this pleasure, if not of seeing, then at least of
having seen something beautiful in the company of certain persons, does
exist. The time has now come for me when, on remembering the baptistery,
facing the waters of the Jordan where St John immersed Christ while the
gondola awaited us by the Piazzetta, I cannot remain indifferent to the
fact that there was by my side in this cool twilight a woman clothed in
mourning, whose respectful but enthusiastic fervour matched that of the
elderly woman who can be seen in Venice in Carpaccio’s _St Ursula_,¹⁷
and that nothing can ever again remove this red-cheeked, sad-eyed woman,
in her black veils, from the softly lit sanctuary of St Mark’s where I
am certain to find her, because I have reserved a place there in
perpetuity, alongside the mosaics, for her, for my mother. Carpaccio,
whom I have just cited, and who was the painter that we preferred to
visit when I was not working at St Mark’s, on one occasion almost
revived my love for Albertine. It was the first time that I had seen
_The Patriarch of Grado exorcizing one possessed_.¹⁸ I was looking at
the admirable carmine and violet sky against which stand those tall,
inlaid chimneys, whose waisted forms and red, tulip-like blooms call to
mind so many paintings of Venice by Whistler. Then my eyes travelled
from the old wooden Rialto bridge to the fifteenth-century Ponte Vecchio
and its marble palaces decorated with gilded capitals, and returned to
the Canal where the boats are steered by youths wearing pink doublets
and caps topped with osprey feathers, almost identical to those which
faithfully recalled Carpaccio in the dazzling ballet _The Legend of St
Joseph_¹⁹ by Sert, Strauss and Kessler. And finally, before leaving the
painting, my eyes returned to the quay, which was teeming with scenes
from the Venetian life of the time. I saw the barber wiping his razor,
the negro carrying his barrel, the Muslims in conversation, Venetian
noblemen dressed in ample brocade or damask robes and cherry-coloured
velvet caps, when suddenly I felt a slight tug at my heart. On the back
of one of the Companions of la Calza,²⁰ recognizable from the gold and
pearl embroidery which inscribed on their collar or their sleeve the
proud guild of which they were members, I had just recognized the coat
that Albertine had worn to accompany me to Versailles in an open
carriage, that evening when I was far from suspecting that hardly
fifteen hours were to separate me from the moment of her departure. As
she was always ready for anything, when I had asked her to leave, on the
sad day that in her last letter she was to name: _twice twilit, since
night was soon to fall and we would part_, she had slung over her
shoulders a Fortuny coat that she was to take away with her the
following morning and that I had never since recalled to mind. Now it
was in this painting by Carpaccio that this brilliant scion of Venice
had found it, it was from the shoulders of this Companion of la Calza
that he had unclasped it, in order to drape it over the shoulders of so
many Parisian ladies, who were doubtless as ignorant as I had been of
the fact that the original could be found among a group of aristocrats
in the foreground of the _Patriarch of Grado_ in one of the rooms of the
Accademia in Venice. I had recognized it all, and the forgotten coat
having restored to me, as I looked at it, the eyes and the heart of the
man who that night was to leave for Versailles with Albertine, for a few
seconds I was invaded with indistinct, impermanent feelings of desire
and melancholy.

And finally there were days when my mother and I were not content to
stay in the museums and the churches of Venice, and so one day when the
weather was particularly fine, wanting to see those Vices and Virtues
whose reproductions M. Swann had given me, and which were probably still
pinned upon the wall of the study in our house at Combray, we travelled
out to Padua; after crossing the gardens of the Arena Chapel under the
midday sun, I entered the chapel with its Giottos²¹ where the whole
ceiling vault and the background of the frescoes are so blue that it
seems as if the radiant daylight had crossed the threshold at the same
time as the visitor and had come for a moment to seek out shade and
fresh air for its limpid sky; whose purity, once cleansed of the gilding
applied by the sunlight, took on only a very slightly darker tone, as
happens during those brief moments of respite which interrupt the finest
days, when, without a cloud in sight, the sun averts its gaze for a
moment and the azure sky, growing still softer, darkens. In the sky thus
transposed onto a blue-toned stone heaven, I caught my first glimpse of
angels in flight, for M. Swann had given me reproductions only of the
Virtues and Vices and not of the frescoes that retrace the story of
Christ and the Virgin Mary. And now I detected in the flight of these
angels the same effect of concrete and literally real action as I had in
the postures of Charity or Envy. With all the celestial fervour, or at
least, the well-behaved, childish concentration, that joins their little
hands in prayer, the angels in the Arena Chapel are represented rather
as if they were a distinct species of flighted fowl that had actually
existed and had been portrayed in Old and New Testament times. These
small creatures can always be relied on to flutter in escort ahead of
any passing saint; there are always one or two in the air in readiness,
and, since they are real creatures, actually able to fly, you can see
them taking off, climbing and banking, looping the loop with the
greatest of ease, diving head-first towards the ground with a great
flurry of wings designed to keep them in the air against the laws of
gravity, and they call to mind much more some extinct variety of bird,
or the young pupils of Roland Garros²² learning to glide, than angels of
the art of the Renaissance or later periods, whose wings are purely
emblematic and whose deportment is usually no different from that of
flightless celestial beings.

On returning to the hotel, I met some young women, mostly from Austria,
who had come to Venice to enjoy the first fine days of its flowerless
spring. One of them had features that, without reminding me of
Albertine, appealed to me through the same freshness of complexion and
the same cheerful, humorous eyes. Soon I felt that I was starting to say
the same things to her as I had said to Albertine at first, and that I
was hiding the same pain when she told me that she would not see me the
next day, for she was going to Verona, and immediately I too felt the
desire to go to Verona. It was not to last, she was due to return to
Austria and I would never see her again, but I was already vaguely
jealous, as one is on starting to fall in love, and, while watching her
charming, enigmatic face, I wondered if she too loved women, if what she
shared with Albertine, the luminous complexion and bright eyes, the
friendly, open airs that seduced everyone around her, and which arose as
much from her total lack of interest in the actions of others as from
the exaggeratedly childish lies with which she attempted to disguise her
own actions, was not part of the morphological constitution of women who
love other women. Was this the part of her that escaped my rational
analysis, attracted me and caused me anxiety (perhaps the deeper cause
of my attraction through its drive towards potential suffering), that
gave me when I saw her so much pleasure and sadness, like those
invisible magnetic elements in the air of certain countries that cause
us to feel so ill at ease? Alas, I was never to know. When I tried to
read her expression I would have liked to say, ‘You should tell me, I
would be interested to learn one of the laws of human natural history,’
but she would never tell me; she professed a particular repulsion for
this vice and maintained a studied coldness with her female friends.
This might even have been evidence that she had something to hide,
perhaps she had been teased or ashamed because of it, and the airs she
adopted in order to prevent people believing it were like the eloquent
distance kept by animals from men who have beaten them. As for finding
out about her life, this was impossible; even in Albertine’s case I had
taken so long to discover the slightest thing! It had taken her death to
loosen people’s tongues, so prudent and circumspect had Albertine been
in her behaviour, just like this young woman! And was I sure of knowing
anything even about Albertine? And then just as the conditions of life
that we desire the most become of no interest to us if we cease to love
the person who unknown to us made us desire them because she allowed us
to live by her side and, as far as we were able, to give her pleasure,
so it is with certain kinds of intellectual curiosity. The scientific
importance that I placed in knowing what kind of desire was hidden
beneath the pale pink petals of her cheek, in the sunless light of her
pale eyes glowing like early dawn, in the days that she never discussed,
would doubtless disappear when I no longer felt the slightest love for
Albertine or when I no longer felt the slightest love for this young
woman. In the evenings I went out alone, surrounded by this enchanted
city where I found myself in the middle of unknown neighbourhoods like a
character from the _Arabian Nights_. It was most unusual for me not to
chance upon some spacious, unknown square of which no guide or traveller
had informed me. I had plunged into a network of alleyways, the _calli_.
In the evening, with their tall, waisted chimneys turning the brightest
of pinks as they were caught in the sunlight, there was a whole garden
in flower on the roof-tops, with such a variety of shades that it looked
as if a connoisseur of tulips from Haarlem or Delft had planted a garden
on top of the city. And moreover the sheer proximity of the houses made
each window the frame which a kitchen-girl looked dreamily through, a
girl sitting having her hair combed by an old woman, whose face,
half-hidden in shadow, seemed that of a witch – creating from the poor,
silent individual houses, huddled together because of the extreme
narrowness of the _calli_, a virtual exhibition bringing a hundred Dutch
paintings together. Squeezed up against each other, these _calli_
divided each part of Venice, sectioning it between a canal and the
lagoon into a branching lattice of cracks, as if it had crystallized
into this myriad of fragile, intricate forms. Suddenly, at the end of
one of these little streets, the crystalline matter seemed to have
produced a swelling. A vast, sumptuous _campo_ of a size that I
certainly could not have guessed, let alone found room for in this
network of little streets, stretched out before my eyes, surrounded by
enchanting palaces, in the pale light of the moon. It was one of those
architectural ensembles towards which in other towns you are guided by
streets that lead there, pointing the way. Here it seemed deliberately
hidden in a criss-cross of alleyways, like those palaces in Oriental
tales where a character who was led there by night and taken back home
before morning is unable to find the magical dwelling and finally
believes that he saw it only in his dreams. The next day I set off in
search of my beautiful nocturnal palace, I followed _calli_ which all
looked the same and refused to give me the slightest indication, except
to lead me further astray. Occasionally a vague allusion that I thought
I recognized led me to believe that I would then see appear, in all the
solitude of its silent and solitary confinement, the beautiful, exiled
square. At which moment the evil genie, having taken on the appearance
of a new _calle_, caused me to retrace my steps against my better
intentions, and I suddenly found myself led back to the Grand Canal. And
since between the memory of a dream and the memory of something real
there is no great difference, I finally started wondering whether the
strange drift into this sombre fragment of Venetian crystallization,
revealing to my moonlit meditations a great square surrounded by
Romantic palaces, had not occurred while I was asleep.

But it was the desire not to lose for ever certain women, rather than
certain squares, that kept me, for as long as I was in Venice, in a
state of agitation which turned feverish the day my mother had fixed for
our departure, when at the end of the day, our trunks having already
left for the station by gondola, I read in the hotel register of guests
due to arrive at the hotel the name of the _Baroness Putbus and her
entourage_. Immediately the impression of all the hours of carnal
pleasure that our departure would cause me to miss raised this desire,
lying endemic within me, to the status of an emotion, in a flood of
vagueness and melancholia; I asked my mother to postpone our departure
for a few days; but the expression on her face, showing that she did not
for a moment entertain my plea, or even take it seriously, aroused in my
nerves, already exacerbated by the Venetian springtime, my old desire to
resist a fictitious plot hatched against me by my parents, who imagined
that I would be forced to obey, awakened that urge to struggle which
formerly drove me brutally to impose my will on those whom I most loved,
even if it meant that I would hasten to obey their wishes as soon as I
had obtained their submission. I told my mother that I would not leave,
but she, believing it more subtle to look as if she thought that I was
not speaking in earnest, did not even deign to reply. I insisted that
she would soon see whether I was in earnest or not. The porter came to
deliver three letters, two for her, and one for me, which I put in my
wallet with all the others without even looking at the envelope, and
when the time came for her to leave for the station, followed by all my
effects, I asked for a drink to be served me on the balcony overlooking
the Canal and settled down to watch the sunset, while a musician, on a
boat moored opposite the hotel, sang ‘_O sole mio_’.²³ The sun sank
lower in the sky. My mother would have nearly arrived at the station.
Soon she would be gone, and I would be alone in Venice, alone with the
sad knowledge that I had upset her and without her presence to console
me. It was nearly time for the train to leave. My irrevocable solitude
loomed so large that it seemed to me to have already started, and to be
absolute. For I felt alone in the world, alienated from all things, and
I was not calm enough to detach myself from my palpitating heart and
impose some stability on the world around me. The city I saw before me
was still Venice. Its personality and its name appeared to me as
mendacious fictions that I no longer had the heart to relate to its
stones. The palaces appeared reduced to their congruent parts and their
portions of indifferent marble, and the waters to a combination of
nitrogen and hydrogen, eternal and blind, anterior and exterior to
Venice, ignorant of Turner and the Doges. And yet this unexceptional
place was as alien as a place where you have just arrived, which does
not yet know you, or a place that you have left and that has already
forgotten you. There was nothing now that I could tell it about me,
nothing of mine that I could invest it with, it forced me to withdraw
within myself, I was no more than a beating heart and a mind anxiously
following the words of ‘_O sole mio_’. However much I tried to anchor my
thoughts to the familiar and beautiful curve of the Rialto, it appeared
to me both proven and banal that the bridge was not only inferior, but
as alien to the idea that I had gained of it as would be an actor whose
blond wig and black doublet failed to persuade me that essentially he
was Hamlet. Like the palaces, the Canal and the Rialto were bereft of
the ideas that made them original and were dissolved into their crudely
material elements. But at the same time this mediocre place seemed far
distant from me. In the dock of the Arsenal, for a perfectly scientific
reason, its latitude, things took on a peculiar aspect, as they do, even
when they seem similar to those of our own country, once they are exiled
to foreign climes, revealing their otherness; I felt that this horizon,
however close, barely an hour away, was a far-flung curve of the Earth’s
surface which the vagaries of travel had moored close beside me; so that
the Arsenal dock, however trivial and distant, filled me with the same
mixture of fear and disgust that I had experienced when as a child I
accompanied my mother to the Deligny baths;²⁴ for in that fantastical
site composed of dark waters, delimited neither by the sun nor by the
heavens and yet whose cabin-bound surrounds made us feel in communion
with invisible depths lurking beneath human bodies clad in
bathing-costumes, I had wondered whether these depths, hidden from
ordinary mortals by a series of sheds that prevented them from being
seen from the street, did not provide a direct entrance to the
neighbouring ice floes of the polar seas which already flowed through
them, and if this narrow space were not precisely the open seas of the
poles; this unsympathetic Venice, where I was to stay alone, seemed to
me no less isolated and unreal, and it was my distress that the song _‘O
sole mio_’, rising like a lament for the Venice I had known, seemed to
call to witness. Doubtless, if I had wanted to catch up with my mother
and take the train with her, I should have stopped listening to it, I
would have had to make up my mind to leave without an instant’s
hesitation, but that was precisely what I could not do; I stayed
motionless, incapable not only of rising to my feet but even of deciding
that I wanted to stand up. My thoughts, most likely to avoid taking any
decision, were entirely taken up in following the progress of the
successive verses of ‘_O sole mio_’, mentally singing along with the
singer, anticipating the moments when his voice would soar in flight,
and letting myself rise and then fall back with him. Doubtless I was not
in the slightest bit interested in this trivial song, which I had heard
a hundred times before. Listening to it religiously all the way through
brought pleasure neither to myself nor to anyone else. And, finally,
none of the motifs of this vulgar romance, all of which I knew in
advance, could help me with the decision that I needed to take; although
each of the verses which went by in turn became an obstacle to
effectively taking that decision or rather obliged me to take the
contrary decision not to leave, for it kept me waiting. In this way the
intrinsically pleasureless business of listening to ‘_O sole mio_’
became imbued with a profound, almost desperate sadness. I knew well
enough that, in sitting there without moving, I was really taking the
decision not to leave; but admitting to myself, ‘I am not leaving’,
which I was unable to do in such direct terms, became possible for me in
these other terms: ‘I want to listen to one more verse of “_O sole
mio_” ’; but the practical significance of this figurative language did
not escape me, and while I was telling myself ‘All I am doing, actually,
is listening to one more verse’, I knew that this meant: ‘I am going to
stay in Venice on my own.’ And it was perhaps this sadness, resembling a
kind of cold numbness, which constituted the desperate but fascinating
charm of the song. Each note that the singer launched, with a voice
almost muscular in its strength and ostentation, struck me to the very
heart; when the phrase with its low notes was consummated and the piece
seemed to be over, the singer was not satisfied, and repeated it on a
high note as if he felt bound to proclaim once again my solitude and
despair. My mother must have arrived at the station. Soon she would be
gone. I was choking with the anguish caused by this banal Rialto that
was no longer the Rialto, with its view over the Canal that had shrunk
now that the soul of Venice had drained away from it, by this song of
despair that ‘_O sole mio_’ had become, and which, thus declaimed before
the inconstant palaces, finally made them crumble and reduced Venice to
ruin; I was watching over the gradual realization of my misfortune,
constructed artistically, unhurriedly, note by note by the singer,
watched by the astonished sun, which had stopped still behind San
Giorgio Maggiore, so that this crepuscular light was for ever to forge
my trembling emotions and the singer’s voice of bronze into an
equivocal, unchangeable and poignant alloy in my memory.

In this way I remained motionless with my will-power dissolved, taking
no apparent decision; doubtless at such moments the decision has already
been taken: even our friends can often predict it. But we ourselves
cannot, otherwise we would be saved much suffering.

But at last, from caverns darker than those from which more predictable
comets are launched – thanks to the unsuspected defensive powers of
inveterate habit, and the hidden reserves that it can suddenly mobilize
and throw into the ring at the very last moment – my action suddenly
materialized: I ran for dear life and reached the train after the doors
had closed, but still in time to get on board and find my mother,
flushed with emotion, holding back her tears, believing that I was not
going to come. Then the train left and we saw Padua then Verona move up
to the window, coming nearly into the station to wave us good-bye, and,
since they were not leaving, they let us move away and went back to
their usual occupations, one in her fields, the other on her hillside.

The hours passed. My mother was in no hurry to read the two letters
which she had merely opened, and she tried to prevent me from getting
out my wallet straight away to take out the letter that the hotel
concierge had given me. She was always worried that I would find a
journey too long and too tiring, and she put off until as late as
possible, so as to give me something to do during the last hours, the
moment when she would unpack the hard-boiled eggs, pass me the
newspapers and unwrap the packet of books that she had bought to
surprise me. First I watched my mother reading her letter with
astonishment, then she raised her head, and her eyes seemed to struggle
with a whole series of separate, incompatible memories that she could
not manage to reconcile. Meanwhile I had recognized Gilberte’s
handwriting on my envelope. I opened it. Gilberte announced her marriage
to Robert de Saint-Loup. She said that she had sent a telegram to me in
Venice on this subject but had received no reply. I remembered how
unreliable the Venetian telegraph service was reputed to be. I had never
received her despatch. Suddenly my brain felt a fact that had lodged
there in the guise of a memory leave its place to make room for another.
The despatch that I had recently received and that I had thought came
from Albertine was from Gilberte. Since the rather factitious
originality of Gilberte’s handwriting consisted principally in placing,
in the line above the line she was writing, the crosses on her _t_’s,
making them look as if they were underlining the words higher up, or
making the dots on her _i_’s look as if they were breaks in the
sentences of the line above, and on the other hand to insert in the
lines below the tails and the curlicues of the words that were written
above, it was natural enough that a telegraph clerk should have read the
scrolls of the _s_’s or the _y_’s of the upper line as a final ‘_ine_’
closing the name of Gilberte. The dot on the _i_ of Gilberte had ridden
up to make a dash. As for her _G_, it had the appearance of an _A_ in
Gothic script. The fact that in addition to this, two or three words had
been misread, entangled as they were (besides, I myself had found some
incomprehensible), was enough to explain the details of my error, and it
was not even necessary. How many characters in each word does a person
read when his mind is on other things and when he is already sure that
he knows who the letter is from? How many words in each sentence? We
guess as we read, we invent; everything stems from one initial error;
those that follow (and this not only in reading letters and telegrams,
not even only in all acts of reading), however extraordinary they may
seem to someone who does not share the same starting-point, are natural
enough. Thus it is that a great deal of what we believe to be true, not
to mention the ultimate conclusions that, with equal perseverance and
good faith, we draw from it, results from an initial misconception of
the premiss.
CHAPTER 4

_A New Side to Robert de Saint-Loup_

‘Oh, how incredible! said my mother. Listen, I know that at my age one
should no longer be surprised by anything, but I assure you that nothing
could surprise me more than the news in this letter. – Yes, but listen
to me, I replied, I don’t know what it says, but whatever the news, it
cannot be more amazing than what I have just learned from my letter.
It’s a marriage. Robert de Saint-Loup is going to marry Gilberte Swann.
– Ah!’ my mother replied, then that must be what I shall find in the
other letter, the one that I haven’t opened yet, for I recognized your
friend’s writing.’ And my mother smiled at me with the tenderly
concerned air that every event, however trivial, evoked in her if it
affected human beings capable of suffering, remembering, and sharing
others’ mourning. Thus my mother smiled and spoke to me with a gentle
voice as if she feared that, if she treated the marriage lightly, this
might disparage the melancholy feelings it was likely to evoke in
Swann’s widow and his daughter, as well as Robert’s mother, preparing to
be separated from her son, on to whom my mother, out of kindness and out
of sympathy inspired by their kindness to me, projected her own
sensitivity, at once filial, conjugal and maternal. ‘Wasn’t I right to
tell you that you would find nothing more amazing? I asked her. – Well,
actually, no, she replied gently, it is I who have the most
extraordinary news, if not ‘la plus grande, la plus petite’, for that
quotation from Mme de Sévigné made by people who knew nothing else of
her work exasperated your grandmother as much as ‘La jolie chose que
c’est de faner’.¹ We do not stoop to glean such common-or-garden
Sévigné. This letter announces the marriage of the young Cambremer. –
Oh, yes, I said, with no interest, to whom? But in any case the nature
of the bridegroom has already removed from this marriage any element of
excitement. – Unless the nature of the bride were to restore it? – And
who is this bride? – Ah, if I tell you straight away you won’t have
deserved it, come on, try a little harder,’ said my mother, seeing that
we had not yet reached Turin and wanting to leave me something
substantial to get my teeth into, and something to wash it down with.
‘But how am I supposed to know? Is it someone brilliant? If Legrandin
and his sister are pleased, we can be sure that it is a brilliant
marriage. – I don’t know about Legrandin, but the person who has told me
of the marriage says that Mme de Cambremer is delighted. I don’t know
whether you will call it a brilliant marriage. For me it calls to mind
those marriages from the days when a king could marry a shepherdess,
except that the shepherdess is even less than a shepherdess, although
very charming. Your grandmother would have been stupefied, if not
displeased. – But whoever is this bride? – It is Mlle d’Oloron. – She
sounds imposing, and most un-shepherdess-like, but I just don’t see who
you mean. It’s a title that used to run in the Guermantes family. –
Precisely, and it was granted by M. de Charlus to Jupien’s niece when he
adopted her. She it is who is due to marry the young Cambremer. –
Jupien’s niece! That’s impossible! – It is virtue rewarded. It’s a
marriage from the end of a novel by George Sand,’ said my mother. ‘It’s
the wages of sin, it’s a marriage from the end of a novel by Balzac,’ I
thought. ‘After all, I said to my mother, when you come to think about
it it is natural enough. It allows the Cambremers to drop anchor at the
Guermantes’, where they never dared hope pitch their tent; what is more,
the child, since she was adopted by M. de Charlus, will have plenty of
money, which was indispensable for the Cambremers since they had lost
their own; and finally she is the adopted and, according to the
Cambremers, probably the real – that is, the natural – daughter of
someone whom they consider to be a prince of the blood. A bastard of an
almost royal house has always been considered a flattering match by
nobility, French or foreign. There is no need even to go back so far as
the Lucinges,² for only six months ago you will recall the marriage of
one of Robert’s friends with that young lady whose sole claim to a place
in society was that she was supposed, rightly or wrongly, to be the
natural daughter of a sovereign prince.’ My mother, while maintaining
the caste distinctions of Combray according to which my grandmother
would have been bound to be scandalized by this marriage, wanted above
all to prove her mother’s good judgment, and added: ‘In fact the girl is
perfection itself and your dear grandmother would not even have needed
her enormous kindness and infinite indulgence to avoid severity in
judging young Cambremer’s choice. Do you remember how distinguished she
found the girl one day long ago when she called in to have her skirt
mended. She was only a child then. And although now so to speak an old
maid left ripening on the shelf, she is quite another woman, a thousand
times more perfect. But your grandmother had taken that all in at a
glance. She had found the great-niece of a waistcoat-maker more “noble”
than the Duc de Guermantes.’ But even more than praise my grandmother,
my mother needed to find that it was ‘better’ for her not to be able to
witness these events. This was the supreme aim of her affection, as if
she were sparing her one last sorrow. ‘And yet,’ my mother asked me,
‘would you believe that old father Swann, although it is true that you
never knew him, could have thought that one day he would have a
great-grandson or a great-granddaughter in whose veins would mingle the
blood of old mother Moser, who used to say “Goot mornink, Chentlemen”,
and the blood of the Duc de Guise!³ – Actually, Mama, it is even more
extraordinary than you say. For the Swanns were very fine people, and
given their son’s position, if only he had made a good marriage, then
his daughter could have made an even finer one. But everything had to
start from scratch again because he married a tart. – Oh, a tart, now
really. We must have been cruel. I never believed everything people said
about her. – Oh yes, she was a tart, and I’ll let you into some of the
‘family’ secrets one of these days.’ Plunged in her day-dreams, my
mother said: ‘The daughter of a man your father would never have allowed
me to greet, and she’s marrying the nephew of Mme de Villeparisis, whom
your father refused to allow me to call on at first, because he found
her socially too grand for us!’ She continued: ‘Mme de Cambremer’s son,
to whom Legrandin so feared to recommend us because he didn’t find us
classy enough, marrying the niece of a man who would never have dared
come to see us without using the servants’ staircase! … After all, your
poor grandmother was right, you remember, when she said that great
aristocrats did things which would shock the petty bourgeoisie, and that
Queen Marie-Amélie was spoiled for her by the advances which she had
made to the Prince de Condé’s mistress to get her to persuade him to
make a will in favour of the Duc d’Aumale.⁴ Do you remember how shocked
she was to learn that for centuries the maidservants of the house of
Gramont, who were veritable saints, bore the name of Corisande in memory
of the liaison of a progenetrix of theirs with Henri IV?⁵ These things
may also happen in the bourgeoisie, but they are more carefully hidden.
Imagine how it would have amused your grandmother!’ my mother said sadly
– for the pleasures we were sad for my grandmother to miss were the
simplest of life’s pleasures, a piece of news, a play, or even a mere
‘skit’ that would have amused her. ‘Don’t you think that she would have
been amazed? Yet I’m sure that these marriages would have shocked your
grandmother, that she would have suffered, I think it’s better for her
to have known nothing about them,’ my mother continued, as she liked to
think that, given my grandmother’s marvellously singular nature, she
would have been most peculiarly struck by them and that her impressions
would have been extraordinarily important. Formerly, faced with any sad
and unpredictable event, the disgrace or ruin of one of our old friends,
some public calamity like an epidemic, a war, or a revolution, my mother
believed that it was probably better that my grandmother should never
have known about it, for she would have been too upset and might not
have been able to survive it. And when the subject was an event as
shocking as these, my mother, from an emotional reaction opposite to
that of the ill-willed, who prefer to hope that those whom they dislike
have suffered more than people think, did not, in her affection for my
grandmother, want to admit that anything sad or belittling might have
happened to her. She continued to imagine my grandmother beyond the
reach of all ills, even the most unpredictable, thinking that the death
of my grandmother had perhaps on balance been a blessing in sparing this
so noble nature the all too ugly sight of modern times, which she would
not have been able to accept. For optimism is the philosophy of the
past. Since the events which actually happened, among all those which
might have, are the only ones that we know, the harm that they have done
us seems inevitable, and we credit them with being responsible for the
little good which they have been unable to avoid bringing with them,
imagining that without them it would never have come to pass. At the
same time she tried to guess what my grandmother would have felt on
learning the news, and simultaneously wanted to believe that our minds,
being of a lower order than hers, were unable to guess it. ‘Just
imagine’, my mother started to say, ‘how astonished your poor
grandmother would have been!’ And I felt that my mother suffered from
not being able to pass on the news, sad that my grandmother would never
know it, and found something unjust in the way life could bring to light
facts which my grandmother would have found unbelievable, thus rendering
false and incomplete after the event the knowledge of people and society
that she had taken to her grave, the marriage of the young Jupien girl
with Legrandin’s nephew having been of a nature to modify my
grandmother’s general philosophy just as much as the news – if my mother
had been able to convey it to her – that the problems of aerial
navigation and wireless telegraphy, which my grandmother had believed
insoluble, had been resolved. But we shall see that this desire to
enable my grandmother to share in the benefits of our knowledge seemed
to my mother yet too selfish. What I learned – for I had not been able
to witness it all while in Venice – was that Mlle de Forcheville had
been solicited by the Duc de Châtellerault and the Prince de Silistrie,
while Saint-Loup had been trying to marry Mlle d’Entragues, daughter of
the Duke of Luxembourg. This is what had happened. Mlle de Forcheville,
with her hundred million francs, seemed to Mme de Marsantes an excellent
match for her son. Her mistake was to say that she was a charming girl,
that she had no idea whether she was rich or poor, and preferred not to
know, but that even without a dowry it would be a boon for even the most
discriminating young man to have such a wife. This was going rather far
for a woman tempted only by the hundred million and indifferent to the
rest. Everyone immediately realized that she had her own son in mind.
The Princesse de Silestrie uttered shrieks of protest, expatiated on the
grandeur of Saint-Loup, and proclaimed that if Saint-Loup married the
daughter of Odette and a Jew, that would be the end of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain. No matter how sure of herself she felt, Mme de Marsantes
did not dare pursue her claim further, and withdrew in the face of these
protestations by the Princesse de Silestrie, who immediately forwarded a
proposal from her own son. Mme de Marsantes had cried out in protest
only in order to reserve Gilberte for herself. However, unwilling to
settle for failure, Mme de Marsantes had immediately turned to Mlle
d’Entragues, the daughter of the Duke of Luxembourg. The latter party,
with a mere twenty million francs to her name, was less suitable, but
Mme de Marsantes made it publicly known that a Saint-Loup could not
marry a Mlle Swann (the name of Forcheville was not even mentioned).
Some time afterwards, when someone tactlessly said that the Duc de
Châtellerault was considering marriage with Mlle d’Entragues, Mme de
Marsantes, who was unrivalled for her susceptibility, took umbrage,
readjusted her fire, switched to Gilberte, had a proposal made on behalf
of Saint-Loup and concluded the engagement forthwith.

The engagement elicited animated commentaries in the most diverse
milieux. Several lady-friends of my mother’s, who had seen Saint-Loup in
our house, called on her during her ‘visiting hours’ to ascertain
whether the fiancé was indeed the same person as my friend. Some people
went so far as to claim that it was not the Cambremer-Legrandins who
were involved in the other marriage. They had this on good authority,
since the Marquise, née Legrandin, had denied it on the eve of the very
day that the engagement was announced. I for my part wondered why M. de
Charlus on the one hand and Saint-Loup on the other, who had both had
occasion to write to me shortly beforehand and had spoken so amiably of
their travel plans, whose execution would have prevented all possibility
of such ceremonies, had made no mention of it. I concluded, without
considering how people keep such matters secret until the last moment,
that I was less their friend than I had thought, which, in the case of
Saint-Loup, distressed me. And why indeed, having remarked that the
friendliness and openness of the aristocracy, ‘peers and fellows on an
equal footing’, was a charade, should I expect to be an exception? In
the house of pleasure – in which men rather than women were increasingly
procured for one’s pleasure – where M. de Charlus had surprised Morel
and where the ‘vice-Madam’, a fervent reader of the _Gaulois_, who
commented on events in high society, declared, when speaking to a stout
gentleman who came to drink endless bottles of champagne in her
establishment in the company of young men, because he wanted to develop
his already considerable girth into an obesity certain to ensure that he
would never be ‘caught up’ in any war that might break out: ‘It appears
that young Saint-Loup is “that way inclined” and young Cambremer too!
Pity their wives! In any case, if you know the betrothed pair, do please
send them along, they will find their heart’s desire here, and help us
earn a lot of money.’ Upon which, the stout gentleman, although himself
being ‘that way inclined’, protested, replying, on slightly snobbish
grounds, that he often met Cambremer and Saint-Loup at his cousins’, the
d’Ardonvilliers, and that they were great connoisseurs of women and very
far from such ‘inclinations’. ‘Ah!’ concluded the vice-Madam with a
sceptical air, but possessing no proof, and remaining convinced that in
our century the perversity of morals was second only to the libellous
absurdities spread by gossip. Some people whom I hardly knew to speak to
wrote to me and asked ‘what I thought’ of these two marriages,
absolutely as if they were conducting an inquiry into the height of the
hats which women wore to the theatre, or into the psychological novel. I
was unable to face replying to these letters. Confronted with these two
marriages, I did not think anything at all, but felt an immense sadness,
as you do when two parts of your past existence, previously moored
alongside you and in which perhaps from one day to the next you may have
been harbouring some half-hearted, secret investment, leave for ever,
with all flags proudly flying, like two ships sailing for foreign parts.
As for the parties themselves, they considered their marriages perfectly
natural, since they themselves and not others were concerned. They had
always had endless scorn for these ‘great marriages’, founded on some
hidden flaw. And even the Cambremers, of such ancient but unpretentious
lineage, would have been the first to forget Jupien and remember only
the forgotten splendours of the house of d’Oloron, if an exception had
not occurred in the shape of the person who should be most charmed by
the marriage, the Marquise de Cambremer-Legrandin. For her spiteful
character led her to prefer to humiliate her relatives rather than seek
to bask in her own glory. Thus, since she did not love her son and had
taken a premature dislike to her intended daughter-in-law, she declared
that it would be a misfortune for a Cambremer to marry a person whose
origins were more or less unknown, and whose teeth were exceptionally
irregular. As for the propensity of the young Cambremer to frequent men
of letters like Bergotte for example or even Bloch, it is easy to
imagine why such a brilliant alliance should not have aggravated his
snobbery, since seeing himself as the successor of the Ducs d’Oléron,
‘sovereign princes’, in the words of the press, made him sure enough of
his grandeur to feel able to frequent anyone. And, on days when he did
not worship some Highness or another, he left the lower nobility to join
the ranks of the lower bourgeoisie. These notes in the press, especially
concerning Robert de Saint-Loup, gave my friend a new grandeur, as they
enumerated his royal ancestors, but one whose only effect was to sadden
me further, as if he had become somebody else, the descendant of Robert
le Fort⁶ rather than the friend who had so recently sat on the folding
seat in the car so that I could have the more comfortable seat in the
back; the fact that I had been taken by surprise by his marriage to
Gilberte, which suddenly surfaced in the letter which I had received, as
unsuspected as a chemical precipitate, making them seem so different
from how I had imagined them the day before, made me suffer, whereas I
should have realized that he had been very busy and that society
marriages often come to pass in this sudden fashion, and often in order
to replace a previous, unsuccessful arrangement. And the sadness which I
felt, as depressing as moving house and as bitter as jealousy, resulting
from the abrupt and accidental clash caused by these two marriages, cut
so deep that people would remind me of it later, as if, absurdly, I
should be proud of it, as if it were quite the opposite of what I had
felt at the time, a double, triple or even quadruple foreboding.

Those in society who had never taken any notice of Gilberte told me with
an air of profound concern, ‘Ah! So she’s the one who is to marry
Saint-Loup,’ and cast on her the attentive eyes of people who not only
avidly follow the events of Parisian life, but also seek instruction and
believe in the profundity of their insight. On the other hand, those who
had met only Gilberte observed Saint-Loup with extreme attentiveness
and, despite often being people who hardly knew me, asked me to
introduce them and returned from their introduction to the bridegroom
brimming with festive joy, saying, ‘He is such a fine figure of a man.’
Gilberte was convinced that the name of the Marquis de Saint-Loup was a
thousand times greater than that of the Duc d’Orléans,⁷ but, as she
belonged above all to a generation of (rather egalitarian) wits, she did
not want to appear any less witty and took pleasure in calling herself
_mater semita_, to which she added, in order to consummate her wit,
‘whereas for me he is my _pater_’.

‘I hear that it was the Princess of Parma who arranged the marriage of
the young Cambremer,’ said my mother, and it was true. For some time the
Princess of Parma had known, on the one hand Legrandin through his
works, and on the other hand, Mme de Cambremer, who changed the subject
whenever the Princess asked her if she was really Legrandin’s sister.
The Princess knew how disappointed Mme de Cambremer was at remaining on
the fringes of high aristocratic society, without being invited inside.
When the Princess of Parma, who had taken it upon herself to make a
match for Mlle d’Oloron, asked M. de Charlus if he knew the identity of
the pleasant, cultivated man who went under the name of Legrandin de
Méséglise (for this was how Legrandin now styled himself), the Baron at
first replied that he did not, then was suddenly struck by the memory of
a man whom he had met one night in a train and who had left him his
card. He smiled vaguely. ‘Perhaps it’s the same man,’ he thought. When
he learned that he was the son of Legrandin’s sister, he said: ‘Well,
that would be quite extraordinary! If he took after his uncle, after
all, that shouldn’t put me off, I have always said that they make the
best husbands. – They? Who do you mean? asked the Princess. – Oh, Madam,
I would willingly explain if we were better acquainted. You are someone
it’s easy to talk to. Your Highness is so intelligent,’ said Charlus,
seized with a need to confide, but which he did not take further. He
liked, if not the parents, at least the name of Cambremer, while knowing
that it was one of the four baronies of Brittany and by far the best he
could expect for his adoptive daughter; it was an ancient and honourable
name, with good connections in the region. A prince would have been
impossible, and actually not desirable. This was what was needed. Then
the Princess summoned Legrandin. He had changed physically quite a bit
in recent years, and rather to his advantage. Like those women who
resolutely sacrifice their faces for the sake of a slim waistline and
spend all their time at Marienbad, Legrandin had taken on the casual
swagger of a cavalry officer. While M. de Charlus had become stouter and
slower, Legrandin had become slimmer and quicker, the contrary effect of
the same cause. Besides, his swiftness had its psychological reasons. He
had become a regular client of certain houses of ill-fame. Since he did
not wish to be seen entering or leaving them, he dashed in and out, and
vanished. When the Princess of Parma spoke to him of the Guermantes or
Saint-Loup, he declared that he had always known them, creating as it
were an amalgam of the fact that he had always known the _name_ of the
Lords of Guermantes and the fact that he had made the acquaintance in
_person_, at my aunt’s, of Swann, the father of the future Mme de
Saint-Loup, that same Swann, one might add, whose wife and daughter
Legrandin refused to frequent in Combray. ‘I even travelled recently in
the company of M. de Charlus, the brother of the Duc de Guermantes. He
spontaneously struck up a conversation with me, which is always a good
sign, for it proves that he is neither a starched-shirt nor a
pretentious fool. Oh! I am well aware of what they say about him. But I
never believe that kind of thing. In any case other people’s private
lives are none of my concern. He struck me as a sensitive man, with a
truly cultivated soul.’ Then the Princess of Parma mentioned Mlle
d’Oloron. In Guermantes circles people were most affected by the noble
heart of M. de Charlus, who, with his proverbial generosity, had secured
the happiness of a poor but charming young lady. And the Duc de
Guermantes, who suffered from his brother’s reputation, let it be
understood that, however fine the action might seem, it was only
natural. ‘I am not sure if you catch my meaning, but everything about
this affair is natural,’ he said, with an awkwardness exaggerated by his
attempt to be subtle. But his aim was to suggest that the young lady was
a daughter of his brother, who wished thus to acknowledge her. At a
stroke, this accounted for Jupien too. The Princess of Parma favoured
this version in order to show Legrandin that Mlle de Cambremer, all
things considered, would be marrying someone of the ilk of Mlle de
Nantes, one of the bastard daughters of Louis XIV who were snubbed
neither by the Duc d’Orléans nor the Prince de Conti.⁸

These two marriages, which my mother and I discussed in the train back
to Paris, had fairly remarkable effects on some of the people who have
so far figured in this story. First, on Legrandin; needless to say he
dashed headlong into M. de Charlus’s mansion, for all the world as if he
were entering a house of ill-fame where he did not wish to be
recognized, but also simultaneously to display his bravado and
dissimulate his age, for our habits persist even in situations where
they are no longer of any use to us, and hardly anyone noticed that in
greeting him M. de Charlus addressed him with a smile even more
difficult to interpret than to detect; this smile was apparently the
same – although actually exactly the opposite – as that exchanged by two
men who habitually frequent high society if by chance they meet in
dubious circumstances (for example at the Elysée Palace, where Général
de Froberville, when in former times he used to meet Swann there,
affected on noticing Swann that air of ironic and mysterious complicity
appropriate to two familiars of the Princesse des Laumes compromised by
meeting at M. Grévy’s⁹). But what was rather remarkable was the real
improvement in his character. Legrandin – ever since the days when as a
child I went to spend my holidays in Combray – had long been cultivating
aristocratic relations which at best yielded no more than the odd
invitation to an unproductive stay in a resort. Suddenly, the marriage
of his nephew having intervened to join these long-separated branches,
Legrandin enjoyed a social situation to which in retrospect his former
relations with people who had frequented him, however closely, only in
private, gave a certain substance. Ladies to whom people wanted to
introduce him made out that he had spent two weeks in the country with
them every year for the last twenty years, and that it was he who had
given them the charming antique barometer in the small drawing-room. He
had by chance been involved in ‘circles’ which included dukes who now
became related to him. Yet as soon as he acquired his social position,
he ceased to take advantage of it. It was not merely because once he was
an official guest he no longer experienced any pleasure at being
invited, but also, because of the two vices which had competed so long
within him, the least natural, snobbery, gave way to the other, more
natural one, since it marked a return, however devious, to nature. No
doubt these two vices are not incompatible, and the back-streets of the
suburbs may well be explored on the way home from a duchess’s shindig.
But, cooling with age, Legrandin turned away from the accumulation of
too many pleasures, from sallying forth without taking all due
precaution, thus rendering his natural pleasures, consisting above all
in friendship and time-consuming chatter, increasingly platonic, making
him spend most of his time with the lower classes and leaving him little
time for life in high society. Mme de Cambremer herself became
relatively indifferent to the friendly advances of the Princesse de
Guermantes. The latter, obliged to frequent the Marquise, had realized,
as always happens when we spend more time with any fellow-beings, with
their inevitable mixture of qualities which we finally discover and
defects which we eventually accept, that Mme de Cambremer was a woman
gifted with an intelligence and endowed with a culture which I for my
part appreciated little, but which seemed remarkable to the Duchesse.
Thus often towards nightfall she called on Mme Cambremer to pay her a
lengthy visit. But the magical charm that Mme de Cambremer had imagined
the Duchesse de Guermantes to possess evaporated as soon as she found
herself solicited by the latter. And she invited her from politeness
rather than pleasure. A more striking change, at once symmetrical with
and different from that which had occurred in Swann after his marriage,
became apparent in Gilberte. Certainly during the first few months
Gilberte had taken pleasure in inviting the most select society.
Doubtless it was only because of the inheritance that she invited the
close friends who mattered to her mother, albeit on certain days only,
when they came on their own, cloistered apart from people of fashion, as
if the contact of people like Mme Bontemps or Mme Cottard with the
Princesse de Guermantes or the Princess of Parma might, like that of two
unstable compounds, have produced some irreparable catastrophe. None the
less, the Bontemps, Cottards and company, however disappointed at having
to dine alone, were proud to be able to say, ‘We dined with the Marquise
de Saint-Loup,’ all the more so because Gilberte occasionally made so
bold as to invite them at the same time as Mme de Marsantes, who, in the
interests of the inheritance, cut a truly distinguished figure with her
tortoiseshell and feather fan. She merely took care from time to time to
sing the praises of those people discreet enough not to call unless
invited, which announcement was intended as a gracious but haughty
salutation for those who had ears to hear, such as Cottard, Bontemps and
company. Perhaps because of my ‘young friend from Balbec’, whose aunt I
would have liked to see me in these surroundings, I would have preferred
to be invited to those evenings. But Gilberte, for whom I was now above
all a friend of her husband and of the Guermantes (and who – perhaps way
back in Combray, in the days when my parents would not speak to her
mother – at an age when we not only attribute some particular quality to
each and every thing but also classify them by species, had invested me
with the sort of prestige which we never lose afterwards), considered
those evenings unworthy of me and would say to me as I was leaving: ‘I
was very pleased to see you, but why don’t you come back tomorrow, you
will meet my aunt Guermantes and Mme de Poix, today it was Mama’s
friends, to keep Mama happy.’ But this lasted only a few months, and
soon everything was totally changed. Was this because Gilberte’s social
life was bound to display the same contrasts as that of Swann? Be that
as it may, Gilberte had not long been Marquise de Saint-Loup (and soon
after, as we shall see, Duchesse de Guermantes) before, having achieved
what was most spectacular and most difficult, thinking that the name of
Guermantes was now incorporated within her like a gilded enamel and that
whomsoever she frequented, she would remain the Duchesse de Guermantes
for all and sundry (which was a mistake, for the value of an
aristocratic title, like that of a share quoted on the stock exchange,
rises when in demand and falls when on offer. Everything we believe
imperishable tends towards destruction; a social position, like
everything else, is not given once and for all but, just like the power
of an empire, is reconstituted from moment to moment through a sort of
endless renewed process of creation, which explains the apparent
anomalies of social or political history over half a century. The
creation of the world did not happen ‘in the beginning’, it happens from
day to day. The Marquise de Saint-Loup thought, ‘I am the Marquise de
Saint-Loup,’ in the knowledge that the night before she had turned down
three invitations to dine with duchesses. But if to a certain extent her
name enhanced the distinctly un-aristocratic circles which she
entertained, by an inverse movement the circles which invited the
Marquise devalued the name that she bore. Nothing resists such
movements, the greatest names finally succumb. Had Swann not known a
princess of the royal house of France whose salon, because anyone at all
could be invited, had fallen to the lowest rung? One day when the
Princesse des Laumes had felt duty-bound to spend a moment with her
Highness, but had found nothing but the lowest sort of company, she had
afterwards visited Mme Leroi and had said to Swann and the Marquis de
Modène: ‘At last I am out of enemy territory. I have just escaped from
Mme la Comtesse de X., where there were no more than two or three
friendly faces’.) Sharing in a word the opinion of the comic-opera
character¹⁰ who declares, ‘My name excuses me, I think, from further
explanation,’ Gilberte started to show her contempt for what she had so
desired, to declare that the inhabitants of the Faubourg Saint-Germain
were fools unfit for company, and, matching words with deeds, did indeed
cease to seek their company. People who first made her acquaintance only
after this period, and, when they first met her, heard this Duchesse de
Guermantes make fun of the society which she could so easily have
frequented, or yawn openly in the face of any one of them, even the most
brilliant, who ventured to call on her, blush retrospectively at having
themselves found some prestige in high society, and would never dare
confide the humiliating secret of their past weaknesses to a woman whom
they believe, through the essential grandeur of her nature, to have
always been incapable of understanding such weakness. They hear her mock
dukes with such brio, and see her, even more significantly, acting in
such close accord with her mockery! Doubtless they would not think of
investigating the causes of the accident which turned Mlle Swann into
Mlle de Forcheville, and Mlle de Forcheville into the Marquise de
Saint-Loup and then the Duchesse de Guermantes. Nor perhaps would they
guess that the effects of this accident would help no less than its
causes to explain the later attitude of Gilberte, since she no longer
regarded the frequentation of commoners in quite the same way as she
would have when Mlle Swann, a lady addressed by everyone as ‘Mme la
Duchesse’, but addressed by the duchesses whom she found tedious as ‘my
dear cousin’. We are easily tempted to disdain an ambition which we have
failed to fulfil or which we have satisfied and outgrown. And we suppose
such disdain inherent even in people whom we did not know at the time.
Perhaps if we could go back down the years, we would find these people
ravaged, more furiously than anyone, by those same faults which they
have managed so completely to hide or overcome that we consider them
incapable not only of ever having been affected themselves but even of
ever excusing them in others, since we assume that they are unable to
imagine them. Meanwhile the salon of the new Marquise de Saint-Loup soon
took on its definitive aspect (at least from a social viewpoint, for, as
we shall see, all sorts of disturbances of a different nature would
erupt there later). Yet this aspect was surprising for the following
reason: people still remembered that the most sumptuous and refined
receptions in Paris, as brilliant as those of the Princesse de
Guermantes, were those of Mme de Marsantes, Saint-Loup’s mother. What is
more, in recent times, Odette’s salon, although held in infinitely less
esteem, had none the less been resplendent with luxury and elegance.
Whereas Saint-Loup, who thanks to his wife’s fortune enjoyed all the
comfort that he could wish, dreamed of nothing more than the
tranquillity of finishing a fine dinner in the company of artists
playing him good music. And this young man, who had once appeared so
proud and ambitious, invited to share these luxuries friends to whom his
mother would never have spoken. Gilberte for her part put into practice
Swann’s words, ‘I care little for quality, but I fear quantity.’ And
Saint-Loup, who was completely at his wife’s feet, both because he loved
her and because it was precisely to her that he owed this supreme
luxury, took care not to interfere with her tastes, which so closely
resembled his own. In this way Mme de Marsantes’s and Mme de
Forcheville’s great receptions, given for years in order above all to
set up their children as brilliantly as possible, did not generate any
great receptions by M. and Mme de Saint-Loup. They had the finest horses
for riding together, the finest yacht for their cruises – but they never
invited more than two guests at a time. When in Paris they never had
more than two or three friends to dinner; with the result that, by a
process of unforeseen and yet natural regression, their two mothers’
great aviaries had been replaced by a silent nest.

The person who benefited least from these two unions was the young Mlle
d’Oloron, who, already infected with typhoid fever on the day of her
religious nuptials, dragged herself painfully to church and died a few
weeks later. The obituary notice which followed shortly after her death
mingled names like that of Jupien with almost all the great names of
Europe, such as those of the Vicomte and the Vicomtesse de Montmorency,
HRH the Comtesse de Bourbon-Soissons, the Prince of Modena-d’Este, the
Vicomtesse d’Edumea, Lady Essex, and so on. Doubtless, even for those
who knew that the departed was Jupien’s niece, this quantity of grand
alliances was no surprise. The main thing above all is to have such
grand relations. Then the _casus foederis_ comes into play and the death
of a petty commoner throws all of the princely families of Europe into
mourning. But many of the young people of the new generations, not
knowing how things really stood, apart from being liable to take
Marie-Antoinette d’Oloron, Marquise de Cambremer, for a lady of the
noblest birth, might have been liable to commit many another error on
reading the obituary notice. Thus if their excursions through France had
led them into the countryside near Combray, they might not have been
astonished to see that Mme L. de Méséglise and the Comte de Méséglise
were among the first of the mourners, alongside the Duc de Guermantes:
the Méséglise way and the Guermantes way lie side by side. ‘Traditional
aristocracy from the same region, perhaps intermarried for generations,’
they might have thought. ‘Who knows, perhaps it’s a branch of the
Guermantes which bears the name of the Comtes de Méséglise.’ Yet the
Comte de Méséglise bore no relation to the Guermantes at all and did not
even belong to the world of the Guermantes, but rather to the world of
the Cambremers, for the Comte de Méséglise, whose rapid social ascent
had seen him spend only two years as Legrandin de Méséglise, was our old
friend Legrandin. And no doubt of all false titles, no false title could
have been more disagreeable to the Guermantes than this. They had been
related in former times to the genuine Comtes de Méséglise, of whose
line there remained only one woman, the daughter of obscure folk fallen
on hard times, herself married to one of my aunt’s tenant farmers, who
had become prosperous and bought Mirougrain from her. He had transformed
his original name of Ménager into the appellation Ménager de Mirougrain,
so that when people said that his wife’s maiden name was de Méséglise,
they thought this meant that she had been born and bred at Méséglise
just as her husband had been at Mirougrain.

Any other false title would have caused the Guermantes fewer problems.
But the aristocracy knows how to accommodate such problems, and worse,
as long as a marriage judged useful, from whatever point of view, is at
stake. Legrandin, backed by the Duc de Guermantes, was the true Comte de
Méséglise for some people of that generation and for everyone in the
next.

Another error that any uninitiated young reader might have been tempted
to commit would have been to believe that the Baron and Baronne de
Forcheville signed the obituary notice in their capacity as parents and
parents-in-law of the Marquis de Saint-Loup, that is, as the Guermantes
connection. Yet they had no call to figure on their list since it was
Robert rather than Gilberte who was related to the Guermantes. Yet if,
despite such false inferences, the Baron and the Baronne de Forcheville
did figure on the bride’s list and not on that of the Cambremers, the
truth is that it was not through the Guermantes but through Jupien, whom
our more knowledgeable reader will recognize as a first cousin of
Odette.

After the marriage of his adopted daughter, M. de Charlus brought all
his favours to bear on the young Marquis de Cambremer; the latter’s
tastes resembled those of the Baron, who, since he had found them no
obstacle to the marriage with Mlle d’Oloron, could only find him all the
more estimable once he became a widower. This is not to say that the
Marquis did not have other qualities, which made him a charming
companion for M. de Charlus. But even in the case of a man of great
value, it is a quality not to be despised by someone who seeks his
personal friendship, and one which comes in very handy if he also plays
whist. The young Marquis’s intelligence was remarkable and, as people
said even in Féterne when he was still only a child, he really ‘took
after his grandmother’, being just as enthusiastic and musical as she.
Certain other family characteristics recurred in him, but more through
imitation, as happened with the whole family, than through atavism. Thus
it was that, a little while after the death of his wife, having received
a letter signed ‘Léonor’, which I did not recollect as one of his
baptismal names, I understood who my correspondent was only when I read
the final flourish: ‘Please accept my true sympathy.’ This _true_, when
‘placed in context’, added to the first name Léonor the surname
Cambremer.

As the train entered the station in Paris, my mother and I were still
discussing these two reports, which, in order to make the journey seem
less protracted, she had tried to save for the second stage and had
managed to keep from me until we had passed Milan. My mother had very
quickly reverted to what was for her the only true opinion, that of my
grandmother. My mother had at first thought that my grandmother would
have been surprised, and then that she would have been saddened, which
was simply a way of saying that my grandmother would have enjoyed such a
surprising event and that my mother, unable to tolerate depriving my
grandmother of a pleasure, preferred to think that all was for the best,
since such news was of a kind that could not have failed to upset her.
But hardly had we arrived home than my mother already felt that she had
been too selfish in wishing that she could have made my grandmother
share all the surprises that life reserves for us. She still preferred
to suppose that these would not have surprised my grandmother, whose
predictions they merely ratified. And in these surprising events she was
determined to see confirmation of my grandmother’s prophetic visions,
and proof that she had had a mind that was even profounder and more
far-sighted than we had thought. Thus my mother, in her quest to adopt a
position of perfect admiration, lost no time in adding: ‘And yet, who
knows whether your poor grandmother might not have approved? She was so
understanding. And you know, don’t you, that she counted social
connection as opposed to natural distinction for nothing. Well, don’t
you remember, surely you remember, however strange they were, both of
these girls caught her fancy. Think back to the first time she went to
meet Mme de Villeparisis, then when she returned to tell us how vulgar
she had found M. de Guermantes, and yet how lyrically she praised
Jupien. Poor mother, do you remember? She said of the father: “If I had
another daughter, I would give her to him, and his daughter is even
better than he.” And Swann’s little girl! She said: “I must say that she
is charming, just wait and see what a fine marriage she will make.” Poor
mother, would that she could see how well she had judged! Right to the
end, even after her departure, she will give us lessons in foresight,
kindness and good judgment.’ And since the pleasures that we saw my
grandmother deprived of were all the simplest and humblest of life’s
pleasures: enjoying an actor’s tone of voice, appreciating a favourite
menu or the latest novel by a favourite author, Mama said: ‘Wouldn’t she
have been surprised! Wouldn’t she have been amused! What a lovely letter
she would have written in reply!’ And my mother continued: ‘Just imagine
how pleased our poor Swann would have been, since he was so anxious for
his daughter to be invited to the Guermantes’, if he could have seen his
daughter become one of the Guermantes! – Under a name not his own, led
to the altar as Mlle de Forcheville? Do you think that he would have
been as happy as all that? – Ah, that is true, I hadn’t thought of that.
– That’s what makes me unable to rejoice for the little “hussy”; it’s
the thought that she could find it in her heart to drop the name of her
father, who was so good to her. – Yes, you are right, after all, perhaps
it is better that he never knew of it.’ It is as difficult to know
whether something would be more likely to cause pleasure or pain to the
dead as it is to the living! ‘I hear that the Saint-Loups are going to
live at Tansonville. I wonder if Swann’s father, who so wanted to show
off his pond to your poor father, could ever have imagined that the Duc
de Guermantes would often see it, especially if he had come to know of
his son’s dishonourable marriage. But since you yourself have talked so
often to Saint-Loup of the pink hawthorn, the lilac and the irises at
Tansonville, he will understand you better. Now they will belong to
him.’ Thus under the dining-room lamp which encourages them, there
unfolded one of those conversations where the wisdom, if not of nations
at least of families, seizes on some event – a death, an engagement, an
inheritance or a ruin – and places it under the magnifying glass of
memory, throwing it into high relief, dissociating, distancing and
placing in perspective at different points in time and space things
which, for those who have not experienced them, seem to run together on
a single plane – the roll of the deceased, changes of address, sources
of and changes in wealth, transfers of property. Is this wisdom not
inspired by the Muse, whom we should fail to recognize for as long as
possible if we want to preserve the freshness of our impressions and
some creative power, but whom precisely those of us who have avoided her
shall meet in the evening of our lives in the nave of some old village
church, at a moment when all of a sudden they feel less touched by the
eternal beauty expressed in the carvings on the altar than by the
diverse fates which they have suffered, as they moved into a
distinguished private collection or a chapel, then into a museum, or by
the feeling that we are treading on an almost sentient flagstone,
composed of the last remains of Arnauld or Pascal, or quite simply by
deciphering the names of the daughters of the nobleman or the commoner
inscribed on the copper plate of a wooden prie-dieu, imagining perchance
the fresh young faces of these village maidens, the Muse who has assumed
everything rejected by the higher Muses of philosophy and art,
everything unfounded in truth, everything which is merely contingent but
which also reveals other laws: the Muse of history!

Some old friends of my mother’s, from Combray or nearby, came to see her
to talk about Gilberte’s marriage, which did not overawe them at all.
‘You know who Mlle de Forcheville is, she’s quite simply Mlle Swann. And
her best man, Charlus, who passes himself off as a “Baron”, is the old
man who used to keep her mother in full sight of Swann, who found it
advantageous. – Why, whatever do you mean?’ my mother protested. ‘In the
first place, Swann was extremely rich. – Not rich enough, it would seem,
not to need other people’s money. But how does the woman do it, how does
she manage to hang on to her old lovers like that? She managed to
persuade the first one to marry her, then the third, and then she hauls
the second one back from the brink of the grave to get him to act as
best man for the daughter she had with the first, or someone else, since
the sheer number is confusing! Even she has lost count! I said the
third, but the three-hundredth would be more like it. Besides, you know
that she’s no more a Forcheville than you or I, which makes her a good
match for the husband, who obviously isn’t noble either. You can be sure
that only a fortune-hunter would marry such a creature. They say he’s
some M. Dupont or M. Durand or other. If we didn’t have a radical mayor
in Combray now, who won’t even talk to the curé, I would have got to the
bottom of it. Because you know, of course, that when they published the
banns they must have had to give the real name. It’s all very well for
the newspapers and the stationers who print the invitations to call you
the Marquis de Saint-Loup. It doesn’t harm a soul, and if it suits these
good people, I’m the last to want to spoil their fun, what’s it got to
do with me? Since I’ll never visit the daughter of a woman with a
reputation, she can be a marchioness for her servants till the cows come
home. But for the registrar it’s another matter. Ah, if my cousin
Sazerat was still deputy mayor, I would have written to him, and he
would have told me what name he had used for the banns!’

This was, moreover, a period when I saw quite a lot of Gilberte, with
whom I had resumed my friendship: for in the long term the rhythm of our
lives does not scan with the timescale of our friendships. Once a
sufficient period of time has elapsed, we see (just as we see the
revival of former ministries in politics or of forgotten plays in the
theatre) friendly relations resumed, after long years of interruption,
between the same people as before, and revived with pleasure. After ten
years of reasons for one person to be too much in love, and reasons for
the other not to tolerate such despotic demands, the reasons cease to
exist. Only affinities matter, and everything that Gilberte would have
refused me previously, she easily granted me, no doubt because I no
longer desired it. Doing something that had always seemed intolerable or
impossible to her, she now, without our ever discussing the reason for
the change, was always ready to come to me and never in a hurry to
leave; this was because the obstacle had vanished, that is, my love.

A little later I was in fact due to spend a few days at Tansonville. I
was rather embarrassed by the trip, for in Paris I kept a girl-friend
who slept overnight in the _pied-à-terre_ which I had rented for myself.
As some need the scent of a forest or the sound of the lapping waters of
a lake, I needed to feel her sleeping beside me at night and, during the
day, to have her always beside me in the car. For even if we forget a
love affair, it may determine the form of the love affair that follows.
Already in the very heart of the earlier love affair daily habits
existed whose origins we ourselves had forgotten; it was the anguish we
first felt one day which made us desperately desire, then systematically
repeat like rituals whose original meaning is forgotten, our beloved all
the way back to her door, to move her into our home, to attend in person
or through the presence of a trusted friend all her comings and goings –
all these habits are smooth highways where every day our love follows
paths which in former times were scored out by the molten lava of our
ardent emotions. But these habits survive the disappearance of the woman
concerned, even her memory. They shape, if not all our love affairs, at
least certain of our loves, as they recur in turn. And thus in memory of
the forgotten Albertine, my home had demanded the presence of my current
mistress, who was hidden from visitors while filling my life in the same
way as Albertine. And in order to go to Tansonville, I had to get her to
agree to be looked after for a few days by one of my friends who was not
attracted to women. I was going because I had learned that Gilberte was
unhappy, since Robert was deceiving her, but not in the manner which
everyone believed and which perhaps even she still believed, or at any
rate declared. But self-respect, the urge to deceive others and deceive
oneself, and the inevitably imperfect knowledge of one’s betrayal which
is the lot of all deceived people, were aided and abetted by the fact
that Robert, a true nephew of M. de Charlus, showed himself off in
public with women whom he compromised and whom everyone, no doubt even
Gilberte, believed to be his mistresses … Society even felt that he did
not take enough care, refusing to leave the side of the woman he had
brought to a soirée and even escorting her home, leaving Mme de
Saint-Loup to make her own way home. Anyone who thought to say that the
other woman whom he compromised in this way was not his mistress would
have seemed naïve, given the blinding obviousness of the evidence. But
unfortunately I had been put on the track of the truth, a truth which
caused me no end of suffering, by a few words that Jupien let slip. What
was my stupefaction when, a few months before my visit to Tansonville,
having gone to take news of M. de Charlus, who had been suffering from
cardiac irregularities which gave rise to considerable concern, and
finding Jupien on his own, I mentioned some love letters addressed to
Robert and signed Bobette, which had been intercepted by Mme de
Saint-Loup. I had then learned from the Baron’s former factotum that the
person signing himself as Bobette was none other than the violinist and
critic whom we have mentioned and who had played a considerable part in
the life of M. de Charlus! Jupien was unable to speak without
indignation: ‘The lad was free to do whatever he liked. But if there was
one direction he should not have strayed in, it was that of the Baron’s
nephew. All the more because the Baron loved his nephew like a son; he
tried to upset the marriage, it’s a disgrace. And he had to employ the
most fiendish stratagems, for nobody was more opposed by nature to such
things than the Marquis de Saint-Loup. Just think of his extravagant
behaviour with his mistresses! No, the fact that this wretched musician
left the Baron in the underhand way that he did, you can say that that’s
his business. But to take up with the nephew! There are things that one
just does not do.’ Jupien’s indignation was sincere; those people we
call immoral have a moral indignation just as strong as others’, except
only that the object of their indignation is slightly different.
Moreover, people whose own hearts are not directly concerned and who
constantly judge which relationships are inadvisable and which marriages
bad, as if one were free to choose whom one loves, take no account of
the delicious mirage which love projects and which so entirely and
uniquely enfolds the person whom one loves that the ‘folly’ committed by
a man who marries a kitchenmaid or his best friend’s mistress is in
general the only poetical act that he will accomplish in the course of
his whole existence. I understood that there had very nearly been a
separation between Robert and his wife (without Gilberte being aware yet
of what the problem was) and that it was Mme de Marsantes, a loving,
ambitious and philosophical mother, who had arranged, or rather imposed,
the reconciliation. She belonged to that milieu where the endless
mingling and recycling of blood, and the dilapidation of inheritances,
may at any moment reawaken hereditary vices and compromises, either in
the realm of the passions or in that of financial interest. It was with
just such energy that she had formerly sponsored Mme Swann or Jupien’s
daughter’s marriage, and arranged the marriage of her own son with
Gilberte, employing on her own account, with painful resignation, the
same atavistic wisdom that she had lavished on the whole Faubourg. And
perhaps the only reason why she had suddenly rather clumsily
precipitated the marriage between Robert and Gilberte, which certainly
gave her less trouble and caused fewer tears to be shed than making him
break up with Rachel, was the fear that he might take up again with
another tart – or even with the same one, for Robert took a long time to
forget Rachel – and perhaps find salvation without her. Now I understood
what Robert had tried to tell me at the Princesse de Guermantes’: ‘It’s
a shame that your girlfriend from Balbec does not have the fortune
required by my mother, I think that the two of us would have got on well
together.’ He had meant to imply that she was from Gomorrah as he was
from Sodom, or perhaps, if he had not yet arrived there, he enjoyed the
company of only those women whom he could love after a certain fashion
and in the presence of other women. If I had not thus, apart from some
rare flashes of recollection, lost all curiosity to find out anything
about my young friend, I could have questioned not only Gilberte but
also her husband on her account. In the end it was the same factor that
had inspired both in Robert and in me the desire to marry Albertine
(that is, her love for women). But the causes of our desire, like its
ends, were opposite. I had been driven to it by the despair I had felt
at the discovery, Robert by his satisfaction; I in order to prevent her
though constant surveillance from yielding to her inclination; Robert in
order to cultivate it and to enjoy the freedom that he would allow her
to offer him her girl-friends. Whereas Jupien situated so recently the
new orientation that Robert’s carnal tastes had taken, so different from
the original, a conversation which I held with Aimé and which made me
very unhappy, showed me that the former _maître d’hôtel_ from Balbec
dated this divergence or inversion much earlier. This conversation took
place during a two- or three-day stay that I made in Balbec, where
Saint-Loup himself, during a long period of leave, had come with his
wife, whose side, in this first phase, he never left. I had admired how
Rachel’s influence on Robert could still be felt. Only a newly-wed who
has lived for a long time with a mistress knows how to remove his wife’s
coat on entering a restaurant and show her proper respect. During his
affair he has received the education that a good husband should have.
Not far away, at a table near mine, Bloch, surrounded by pretentious
young university dons, exuded an air of bogus relaxation, shouting aloud
to one of his friends, ‘No, no, my dear friend, you give the order. I
have never in my life been able to choose a menu. I’ve never been able
to give orders!’ he repeated with suspect pride and, mingling literature
with gourmandise gave his instant opinion on the bottle of champagne
that he liked to see enhance a conversation ‘in totally symbolic
fashion’. Whereas Saint-Loup knew how to give orders. He was seated
beside Gilberte, who was already pregnant (later he ceaselessly got her
with child), just as he slept with her in their double bed at the hotel.
He spoke only to his wife, the rest of the hotel seemed not to exist for
him, but as soon as a waiter took an order or came near, he raised his
limpid eyes and looked straight at him for no more than two seconds,
while his clear-sighted gaze seemed to display a series of interests and
requests entirely different from those which any other client might have
inspired, however long they spent eyeing a page or a waiter in order to
make remarks about him, witty or otherwise, that he could retail to his
friends. This brief, discreet, indifferent glance, showing that he was
interested in the waiter in his own right, would reveal to anyone who
observed it that this excellent husband, the previously passionate lover
of Rachel, had another dimension to his life, and one which seemed to
him to be infinitely more interesting than the one to which his duty
assigned him. But this was the only visible sign of it. His eyes had
already returned to Gilberte, who had noticed nothing, he introduced her
to a friend of his who was passing through, and he left to take her for
a walk. Now on this occasion Aimé told me of a much earlier time, the
time when I had made the acquaintance of Saint-Loup, also in Balbec,
through Mme de Villeparisis.

‘But, my dear Sir, yes, of course, it’s common knowledge, I’ve known it
for ages. The first year that your good self was in Balbec, M. le
Marquis took my liftboy upstairs, on the pretext of developing some
photos of your own lady grandmother. The lad tried to complain, we had
to go to an awful lot of trouble to keep things quiet. And then, Sir,
I’m sure Sir will remember the day when he came to dine with the Marquis
de Saint-Loup and his mistress, who served as a screen for M. le
Marquis. I am sure Sir will remember that M. le Marquis left on the
pretext of a fit of temper. Of course you know that I am not saying that
Madam was right. She really made him suffer. But you can’t stop me
believing that on that occasion M. le Marquis’s anger was faked, and he
needed to get away from Sir and Madam.’ At least as far as that day was
concerned, I am sure that, even if Aimé was not deliberately lying, he
was entirely mistaken. I remembered only too well the state that Robert
was in and the slap that he had administered to the journalist. And
indeed it was the same for Balbec, either the liftboy had lied, or it
was Aimé who was lying. At least that was what I believed; absolute
certainty eluded me; we never see more than one side of things, and had
it not made me suffer, I would have found a certain beauty in the fact
that, while for me the errand of the ‘lift’ to Saint-Loup had been an
easy way to deliver him a letter and receive a reply, for Saint-Loup it
had served to get him acquainted with someone who had attracted him.
There are at least two sides to every question. Starting from the most
insignificant action that one man accomplishes, another would launch
into an entirely different series of actions. There is no doubt that I
was no more likely to guess the repercussions of the episode involving
Saint-Loup and the liftboy, if it ever took place, that would follow the
banal despatch of my letter than someone with no knowledge of Wagner
other than the duet from _Lohengrin_ could foresee the prelude to
_Tristan_.¹¹ Doubtless, objects present man with no more than a limited
number of their innumerable attributes, because of the poverty of our
senses. Things are coloured because we have eyes; how many other
epithets might they not deserve if we had hundreds of senses? But this
different aspect that they could have had is made easier for us to
understand by what in life is a minimal incident of which we know only a
part, believing it to be the whole, and which someone else perceives as
if through a window on the other side of the house giving a different
view. Supposing that Aimé was not mistaken, Saint-Loup’s blush when
Bloch had mentioned the ‘lift’ to him did not perhaps spring only from
the fact that he pronounced the word as ‘lifed’. But I was convinced
that Saint-Loup’s physiological evolution had not started at this time
and that then he still loved only women. I was able to deduce this
retrospectively more from the friendship that Saint-Loup had shown me at
Balbec than from any other evidence. It was only as long as he still
loved women that he was really capable of friendship. Afterwards, at
least for a period of time, the men who did not interest him directly
were subject to a display of indifference, which was, I believe, partly
sincere, since he had become very cold, but which was also partly an
act, designed to make people believe that he was interested only in
women. None the less I remember that one day at Doncières as I was
setting out to dine with the Verdurins and as he had just been looking
rather lingeringly at Charlie, he had said to me: ‘It’s strange how this
lad reminds me of Rachel. Doesn’t it strike you too? I find that they
have some identical features. Not that it is of any interest to me.’ And
yet meanwhile his gaze remained afterwards trained for some time on the
horizon, as when, before returning to a round of cards or leaving to
dine on the town, we are thinking of one of those long journeys which we
suspect we will never undertake but for which we have felt a sudden pang
of yearning. But if Robert saw something of Rachel in Charlie, Gilberte,
for her part, tried to take on something of Rachel in order to please
her husband, tying her hair with yellow, pink or poppy-red silk ribbons
and adopting the same hair-style, for she was jealous because she
thought that her husband was still in love with Rachel. It may well be
possible that Robert’s love hovered on the boundary between that of a
man in love with a woman and that of a man in love with another man. At
all events the memory of Rachel played no more than an aesthetic role,
and it is even improbable that it could have acted otherwise. One day
Robert went so far as to ask her to dress as a man and to let her
forelock hang loose, and yet he was content merely to look at her,
feeling no satisfaction. He remained none the less attached to her and
paid her scrupulously, if coldly, the enormous allowance which he had
promised her and which did not prevent her later from dealing with him
in the most despicable manner. Gilberte would not have suffered from
this generosity towards Rachel if she had known that it was simply the
dutiful discharge of a promise which no longer corresponded to any real
love. But love was precisely what he feigned to feel for Rachel.
Homosexuals would be the best husbands in the world if they did not
pretend that they loved women. Actually, Gilberte did not complain. It
was the fact that she had thought that Robert had been loved by Rachel,
over such a long period of time, that had made her desire him, and had
made her renounce on his behalf the most attractive matches; she felt in
some way that he was making a concession by marrying her. And indeed at
first he made comparisons between the two women (who were yet so
different in charm and in beauty) which were unfavourable to the
delicious Gilberte. But afterwards the latter grew in her husband’s
esteem while Rachel diminished visibly. Another person who had to eat
her words was Mme Swann. If, in Gilberte’s eyes, Robert was already
surrounded before the marriage by the double halo generated, on the one
hand by his life with Rachel, constantly impugned in Mme de Marsantes’s
lamentations and, on the other hand, by the prestige which the
Guermantes had always had for her father and which she had inherited
from him, Mme de Forcheville, however, would have preferred a more
dazzling marriage, perhaps with a prince (there were impoverished royal
families who would have been glad of the money – which it should be said
turned out to be considerably less than the eighty million francs that
had been mentioned – once rendered odourless by the attribution of the
name of Forcheville) and a son-in-law less devalued by a life spent
outside society. She had been unable to vanquish Gilberte’s will,
complained bitterly to everyone and poured scorn on her son-in-law. But
one fine day everything had changed, the son-in-law had become an angel
and he was mocked only in private asides. This was because age had not
deprived Mme Swann (now Mme de Forcheville) of her habitual tastes as a
kept woman, but, since her admirers had deserted her, it had deprived
her of the means to gratify them. She desired a new necklace every day,
a new dress sewn with diamonds, a more luxurious car, but she did not
have a large fortune, since Forcheville had spent nearly everything, and
– what Jewish ancestry had thus informed Gilberte? – she had an adorable
but dreadfully mean daughter, who calculated every penny of her
husband’s budget and, naturally, that of her mother even more so. Now,
suddenly she had caught scent of and found a protector in Robert. The
fact that she was no longer in her prime was of little importance in the
eyes of a son-in-law who did not love women. All that he asked of his
mother-in-law was that she smooth over the occasional difficulty that
might arise between him and Gilberte and consent to a trip which he
planned to make with Morel. As soon as Odette had got to work, she was
rewarded with a magnificent ruby. Which meant that Gilberte needed to be
even more generous to her husband. Odette persuaded her all the more
fervently since she herself would be the beneficiary. Thus, thanks to
Robert, she was able, on the threshold of her fiftieth (some said her
sixtieth) year to dazzle with extraordinary luxury at any dinner-table
and every soirée to which she was invited, without needing as she had
done before to have a ‘friend’, who now would no longer have forked out,
or even acted his part. Thus she embarked upon a final period of
chastity, which seemed definitive, and she had never been more elegant.

It was not only the ill-will and resentment of the former pauper for the
master who has made him rich, while none the less making him feel the
difference in their conditions (which was in Charlus’s character, and
showed even more in his vocabulary), that had driven Charlie towards
Saint-Loup in order to inflict more suffering on the Baron. It was also
perhaps self-interest. I gained the impression that Robert must be
giving him considerable sums of money. At one reception where I had met
Robert before leaving for Combray and where his manner of exhibiting
himself with an elegant woman who passed for his mistress, clinging to
her sides and publicly entangled in her skirts as if they were one and
the same being, made me think of a sort of ancestral gesture, albeit in
this case more nervous and excited, that I had noticed in M. de Charlus,
as it were billowing in the drapery of Mme Molé or her like, bearing the
standard of a _gynophile_ cause which was not his own but which he
liked, however undeservedly, to flaunt in this fashion, whether because
he found it afforded protection, or whether aesthetic pleasure, I was
struck on my return by how economical this young man, who was so
generous when he was far less rich, had become. That people care only
for their possessions, and that he who was profligate with his
occasional windfalls should then start saving when he comes into his
fortune, is no doubt a fairly common phenomenon, but one which none the
less seems in this case to take on a different aspect. Saint-Loup
refused to hire a cab, and I noticed that he had kept a tramway
transfer-ticket. Doubtless in this way Saint-Loup exploited, to
different ends, talents which he had acquired during his long liaison
with Rachel. A young man who has spent a long time living with a woman
is very different from the virgin whose bride is his first woman. It was
sufficient, on the rare occasions when Robert took his wife out to a
restaurant, to observe his skill and respect in removing her hat and
coat, his art in ordering dinner and having it served, his care in
smoothing Gilberte’s sleeves before she put her jacket back on, to
realize that he had spent a long time as another woman’s lover before
becoming this one’s husband. Similarly, having been obliged to intervene
in the minutest details of Rachel’s housekeeping, partly because she
herself had no idea how to manage it, then later because his jealousy
drove him to supervise her servants with a firm hand, he managed in
administrating his wife’s property and her household to sustain this
skilfully learned role which Gilberte might possibly not have been able
to play and which she willingly left to him. But no doubt he did it
above all to enable Charlie to benefit from the slightest cheese-paring
savings, ultimately keeping him in style without Gilberte noticing or
suffering. Perhaps even because he believed the violinist to be a
spendthrift ‘like all artists’ (Charlie used the title in this way with
no pride and little conviction in order to provide an excuse for not
replying to letters, etc., and for a host of other faults that he
thought were universally agreed to be part and parcel of an artist’s
psychology). Personally I found that it made no difference from a moral
point of view whether one took one’s pleasure with a man or a woman, and
only too natural and human to take it wherever one could find it. So
that if Robert had not been married, his liaison with Charlie ought not
to have caused me the slightest pain. And yet I did feel that the pain I
experienced would have been just as sharp if Robert had still been a
bachelor. Coming from anyone else, what he was doing would have left me
indifferent. But I wept to think that I had in times gone by felt so
great an affection for a different Saint-Loup, and that I felt clearly
from his newly cold and evasive manner that this was no longer
reciprocated, for, since he had found that men could arouse his desire,
they no longer inspired his friendship. How could that have occurred in
a young man who had so loved women that I had seen him in despair when
‘Rachel, when of the Lord’ had tried to leave him? Had the resemblance
between Charlie and Rachel – which was lost on me – been the springboard
for Robert to pass from the tastes of his father to those of his uncle,
thus accomplishing the evolution that even in the latter had happened
rather late in life? And yet on occasion Aimé’s words returned to
disturb me; I remembered Robert that year in Balbec; he had a way of not
looking at the liftboy when he was talking to him in a way that much
recalled M. Charlus’s manner of speaking to certain men. But Robert
could very well have inherited this from M. de Charlus and a certain
hauteur and physical deportment of the Guermantes, and not at all from
the Baron’s special tastes. Thus it was that the Duc de Guermantes, who
had absolutely no such tastes, had the same nervous manner of twisting
his wrist, as if he were fastening a lace cuff around it, and also some
shrill and affected tones in his voice, all mannerisms which in M. de
Charlus would have invited a different interpretation and to which he
himself gave another, as the individual expresses his particularities
through impersonal, atavistic traits which are perhaps merely personal
characteristics from former times which have become crystallized in
terms of voice and gesture. In the light of this latter hypothesis,
which borders on natural history, one would not call M. de Charlus a
Guermantes affected by a flaw and expressing it partly through the
characteristics of the Guermantes race, rather, it would be the Duc de
Guermantes who would be the odd one out in a perverted family, an
individual whom the hereditary malady has so well spared that the
external stigmata which it has marked him with have lost all their
meaning. I remembered that the first day at Balbec when I had seen
Saint-Loup, with his fair complexion and refined physique, seemingly
wrought from some precious substance and looking so mannered as he waved
his monocle in front of him, I had found that he had an effeminate air,
which was certainly not the result of what I was now learning about him,
but a grace specific to the Guermantes, that fineness of Dresden
porcelain in which the Duchesse too was modelled. I also remembered his
affection for me, and his tender and sentimental way of showing it, and
thought that this too, which might have misled someone else, meant
something entirely different at the time, even quite the opposite, from
what I was now discovering. But when had it started? If it was the year
when I had returned to Balbec, how was it that he had not returned even
once to see the ‘lift’, and had never mentioned him to me? And as for
the first year, how could he have noticed him, being as passionately
enamoured of Rachel as he was at the time? That first year, I had found
Saint-Loup eccentric, like a true Guermantes. But he was even more
peculiar than I had thought. Yet when we have had no direct intuition of
something but have learned it only from others, it is too late, we are
unable to transmit it to our soul, for its lines of communication with
reality are closed; so we cannot enjoy the discovery, it comes too late.
Besides, in any case, this discovery hurt me too much for me to take any
intellectual pleasure in it. Of course, after what M. de Charlus had
told me at Mme Verdurin’s in Paris, I no longer doubted that Robert’s
case was common to a host of honourable citizens, even the best and the
most intelligent among them. Learning it of anyone but Robert would have
left me indifferent. The doubts which Aimé inspired in me tarnished our
whole friendship in Balbec and Doncières, and, although I believed
neither in friendship nor that I had ever really felt it for Robert,
when I thought back over these stories about the ‘lift’ and the
restaurant where I had dined with Saint-Loup and Rachel, I had to make
an effort not to weep.

However, I should not have to dwell on this visit to the country near
Combray, and at the time in my life when perhaps I thought least of
Combray, if it had not provided, precisely because of this, at least
temporary confirmation of certain ideas which had first struck me on the
way to Guermantes, and of other ideas that had struck me on the way to
Méséglise. Every evening I retraced, albeit in the opposite direction,
the steps of the walk which we used to take in the afternoon in Combray
when we went out towards Méséglise. Now at Tansonville we dined long
after the hour when in Combray in days gone by we would have been
asleep. And because of the hot weather, and because Gilberte spent the
afternoons painting in the château chapel, we did not set out for our
walk until about two hours before dinner. Our former pleasure, of
observing on our way home how the crimson sky framed the wayside calvary
or dipped into the Vivonne, was replaced by that of leaving at nightfall
and finding the village deserted except for the shifting blue tones and
irregular triangular forms of the sheep coming home. Over one half of
the fields the sun was setting; over the other the moon was already lit
and preparing to bathe them entirely in its light. Sometimes Gilberte
let me go on my own, and I walked onward leaving my shadow in my wake,
like a boat sailing forth through enchanted waters; but usually she came
with me. The walks we took then were most often the same as those we had
taken in earlier days when we were children: now on my way to
Guermantes, how could I have avoided experiencing even more strongly
than ever the feeling that I would never be capable of writing, added to
the realization that my imagination and my sensitivity had weakened,
when I saw how little curiosity Combray inspired in me? I was sad to see
how little I relived my past years. I found the Vivonne narrow and ugly
beside the tow-path. Not that I discovered any major material
discrepancy with what I recalled. But, since I had been separated by my
totally divergent life from the places which I now happened to
rediscover, there was not between them and me that contiguity which,
even before one is aware of it, gives birth to the sudden, delicious,
all-enveloping irruption of memory. Doubtless because I did not
understand their nature, I felt sad to think that my faculties of
feeling and imagining must have diminished if I was experiencing no
pleasure on these walks with Gilberte. Gilberte herself, who understood
me even less well than I did myself, increased my sadness by sharing my
astonishment. ‘However can you not be moved,’ she asked, ‘when you take
the same steep little track that you used to climb in the past?’ And she
herself was so changed that I no longer found her beautiful, and in
fact, she was no longer beautiful at all. While we walked, I saw the
landscape change, as we first climbed steep slopes, but then walked
downhill. I chatted with Gilberte, which I found very pleasant. And yet
it was not all that easy. In so many individuals there are different,
dissimilar layers, the character of the father, the character of the
mother; we traverse first one, then the other. But the next day the
order of the layering is reversed. And ultimately we no longer knows who
could separate the parts and who could be trusted to sit in judgment.
Gilberte was like one of those countries with which we dare not conclude
an alliance because they change government too often. Yet basically we
are wrong. However discontinuous the life of an individual, memory
establishes within him a sort of identity, with the result that he does
not want to break promises that he remembers, even if he did not sign
them himself. As for intelligence, Gilberte’s was very shrewd, give or
take a few eccentricities inherited from her mother. But independently
of her intrinsic qualities, I remember how greatly she astonished me on
several occasions, during the conversations which we held while out
walking. Once, the first time, by telling me that, ‘If you weren’t too
hungry and it weren’t so late, if we took the path on the left and then
turned to the right it would take us less than a quarter of an hour to
reach the Guermantes.’ It was as if she had said, ‘Turn left, then turn
right, and you will grasp the intangible, you will reach the distant and
unattainable goals of which on earth we know only the direction, and
only’ – something I had always previously thought of as all I could ever
know of the Guermantes, and perhaps in a sense I was not entirely wrong
– ‘the “way” towards them’. One of my other moments of astonishment was
to see the ‘source of the Vivonne’, which I had imagined to be something
as extra-terrestrial as the entrance to Hell, and which was no more than
a kind of square wash-tub full of bubbles. And the third time was when
Gilberte said: ‘If you like, we could still go out one afternoon to walk
towards Guermantes, but we could walk past Méséglise, it’s the prettiest
route,’ a sentence which overturned all the ideas of my childhood by
revealing that the two ways were not as irreconcilable as I had thought.
But what struck me the most was how little, during this stay, I relived
my former years, how little I wanted to revisit Combray, and how narrow
and ugly I found the Vivonne. Yet it was during one of those
quasi-nocturnal albeit pre-prandial walks – since she dined so late! –
that she did authenticate for me the fantasies which I had formed around
the way to Méséglise. Just as we were about to enter a mysteriously
smooth and deep valley bathed in moonlight, we stopped for a moment,
like two insects about to dive into the depths of a blue-tinted calyx.
Then Gilberte, perhaps merely acting the well-mannered hostess,
reluctant to let you leave so early and wishing she could have given you
a deeper appreciation of the countryside that you seemed to like, spoke
to me with all the skill of a sophisticated woman adept at mingling
silence, simplicity and sobriety with the expression of feeling, leading
you to believe that you have a place in her life which no one else could
replace. Gushing suddenly with an affection inspired by the sweetness
and warmth of the evening breeze, I replied, ‘You mentioned the steep
little track the other day. How I loved you then!’ She answered, ‘Why
didn’t you tell me? I had no idea. I loved you too. And I even once
threw myself at your feet. – Whenever was that? – The first time, at
Tansonville, you were out walking with your family, I was on my way
home, and had never seen such a handsome little boy. I used’, she added
with an absent and modest air, ‘to go to play with my young friends in
the ruins of the dungeon at Roussainville. And you can guess how naughty
it was, for it was a group of boys and girls of all sorts, and we took
full advantage of the darkness. The choir-boy from Combray, Théodore,
who, I have to admit, was very nice (my God, he was handsome!) but who
has become extremely ugly (now he’s the chemist at Méséglise), had fun
with all the little village girls for miles around. Since they let me
out on my own, as soon as I could get away, I rushed off to join them. I
can’t tell you how much I would have loved to see you there; I remember
only too well, since I had only a moment to tell you, given the danger
of being seen by your parents and mine, how I showed you so crudely what
I wanted that I’m ashamed of it now. But you looked at me so fiercely
that I realized that you didn’t want to.’ And suddenly I thought that
the real Gilberte and the real Albertine were perhaps those who offered
themselves up in a single glance, one by a hedgerow of pink hawthorn,
the other on the beach. And it was I, unable to understand something
which I was to retrieve only later in my memory, after a delay during
which the whole emotional undercurrent of my conversation had made them
fear to be as frank as they had been in the first instance, who had
spoiled everything with my clumsiness. I had ‘bungled’ things more
completely with them than Saint-Loup had with Rachel, and for the same
reasons, although I have to say that my relative failure with them was
less absurd. ‘And the second time’, continued Gilberte, ‘was years later
when I saw you in your doorway, the day before I met you at my aunt
Oriane’s; I didn’t recognize you straight away, or rather I recognized
you without realizing it, since I felt the same urges that I had at
Tansonville. – But in between, there was the Champs-Elysées. – Yes, but
then you were too much in love with me, I felt that you were spying on
my every move.’ I did not think to ask her the identity of the young man
with whom I saw her walking down the Champs-Elysées the day that I had
set out to meet her again, when I might have been reconciled with her
while there was still time, on a day which would perhaps have changed my
life if I had not met two shadowy figures coming towards me side by side
in the twilight. If I had asked her, she might have told me the truth,
as might Albertine, if she had come back to life. And indeed, does death
not come between us and women whom we no longer love but meet again
years later, just as if they were no longer of this world, since the
fact that our love no longer exists makes of the women that they used to
be, or the men that we were, dead people? Perhaps also she might not
have remembered, or she might have lied. In any case I no longer saw any
interest in finding out, since my heart had already changed more than
Gilberte’s face. It no longer appealed to me, but the main thing was
that I was no longer unhappy, and I could not have imagined, if I had
thought of it again, that I could have been so unhappy to see Gilberte
walking slowly side by side with another young man that I could have
thought, ‘It’s all over, I refuse ever to see her again.’ Of the state
of mind which, for the whole of that far-off year, had been nothing but
endless torture to me, nothing remained. For in this world where
everything wears out, where everything perishes, there is one thing that
collapses and is more completely destroyed than anything else, and
leaves fewer traces than beauty itself: and that is grief.

If, however, I am not surprised not to have asked with whom she was
walking down the Champs-Elysées, for I had already seen too many
examples of how Time dulls our curiosity, I am a little surprised not to
have told Gilberte that before meeting her that day I had sold an
antique Chinese vase in order to buy her some flowers. My only
consolation during those very sad times that followed was in fact that
one day I might be able without embarrassment to tell her of this so
tender intention. More than a year afterwards, if I saw that a car was
in danger of striking mine, my only reason for not wanting to die was to
be able to tell this to Gilberte. I consoled myself with the thought,
‘Let’s not rush things, I’ve all my life ahead of me for that.’ And
because of that I did not want to lose my life. Now it would have seemed
to me unpleasant to recount, almost ridiculous and ‘compromising’.
‘Besides,’ Gilberte went on, ‘even on the day that I met you on your
doorstep, you were still so like you were at Combray, if only you knew
how little you had changed!’ I pictured Gilberte again in my memory. I
could have drawn the rectangle of light shed by the sun beneath the
hawthorns, the spade that the little girl held in her hand, the
lingering look that she cast in my direction. Except that, given the
crude gesture which accompanied it, I had seen it as a look of contempt,
because what I wanted seemed to me to be something of which little girls
knew nothing and complied with only in my imagination, during my hours
of solitary desire. Even less could I have imagined that, so easily and
so swiftly, almost under my grandfather’s nose, one of them might have
been so bold as to spell it out.

Thus after so many years I had to touch up the image that I recalled so
well, an operation which made me relatively happy by showing me that the
uncrossable abyss which I had at that time believed to exist between me
and a certain kind of little girl with golden hair was as imaginary as
the abyss described by Pascal, and which I found poetical because of the
long series of years I needed to cross in order to perform this
operation. I felt a renewed pang of desire and regret on thinking of the
dungeons of Roussainville. And yet I was pleased, as I realized that the
happiness which I had striven with all my might to achieve in those
days, and which nothing could ever now restore, had existed elsewhere
than in my thoughts, and indeed so near to me in the Roussainville which
I talked of so often and which I glimpsed from the toilet scented with
iris. And I had had no idea! In short, she had subsumed everything that
I had desired on my walks, when I reached the point where I could not
bear to go home, as I felt that the trees were on the point of becoming
human and parting their limbs. What I had then so feverishly desired,
she had almost, if only I had been able to understand and accept it,
made me taste while still an adolescent. Even more than I had thought,
Gilberte was already at this time fully engaged in the Méséglise way.

And even on the day when I had met her in a doorway, although she was
not the Mlle de l’Orgeville whom Robert had met in a house of ill-fame
(and how extraordinary it was that the person whom I had asked to
enlighten me on this subject was none other than her future husband!), I
had not been entirely mistaken as to the significance of her glance, nor
as to the kind of woman that she was and now admitted to me that she had
been. ‘All that is so long ago,’ she said, ‘I’ve never thought of anyone
but Robert since the day we were engaged. And, you know, those childish
pranks are still not what I regret the most.’
